2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K130 School Name: P.S. 130 THE PARKSIDE Principal: MARIA NUNZIATA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Parkside School 331500010130 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): K130 70 Ocean Parkway, Brooklyn, 11218 Lower School 713 Caton AVE, Brooklyn, NY 11218 Upper School School Address: 718-686-1940 lower school 718-854-9756 lower school 718-686-2270 upper school 718-686- Phone Number: Ms Maria Nunziata Fax: Email Address: mnunzia@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms Maria Nunziata Ms Tricia Ippolito Ms Lisa Zelznick Ms. Ashley Kreamer/ Co-Presidents Ms Maria Nunziata Ivan Banda N/A Steven Brunson District Information Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingstone Street, 3 rd Floor, Brooklyn. askop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 9354317 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Ms Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, 5 th Floor, Brooklyn Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 9353954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Name Ms Maria Nunziata Ms Tricia Ippolito Ms Lisa Zelznick and Ashley KreamerCo-Presidents Ms Carmen Drago Ivan Banda N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Mr Steven Brunson CBO Representative, if applicable Ms Erin Langstaff Alicia Feliciano Ivan Bandana Member/ School Staff Member/ School Staff Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erin Haggerty Ramatu Bangura Kate Fermoile Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a dynamic, multicultural community dedicated to academic excellence, providing a learning forum for students, parents and teachers. This is encompassed in our mission statement, our Theory of Action and our Instructional Focus for 2018/2019. 2018-19 CEP 9  Mission Statement: Public School 130 is a diverse, multicultural community dedicated to the growth of the whole child. We follow a rigorous, standards-based curriculum. PS 130 nurtures the talents and abilities of all children to achieve academic success, develop physical and artistic skills, and grow as active community members. The collaborative efforts of students, staff, and parents support social-emotional growth through consistent and clear expectations, within a responsive setting. We foster a school environment that embraces the diversity of our community and encourages participation by all families. Theory of Action: If we continually strengthen teacher feedback to our students, then instruction will be strengthened and all students will learn in deeper and more meaningful ways. Instructional Focus: Using data to provide goal-oriented feedback to students and families 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 130 in Brooklyn comprises PK-5 grade levels with approximately 806 students enrolled. Our diverse student demographics consists of the following demographics: 19% Asian, 6% Black, 26% Hispanic and 42% White, with 94% of students eligible for free lunch. 13% of students are English Language Learners and 23% of students have IEPs. Currently we have 2 ICT classes in every grade and offer speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy, resource room services and guidance services to students. We offer English as a Second language instruction both pull-out and push-in for students who are learning English. Our school community has changed dramatically over the last few of years with both the gentrification in the neighborhood and the increasing enrollment of general education students, ELL students and students with special needs. Due to our neighborhood’s population growth we received approval from the DOE to create a PS 130 split site, housing grades 3-5 at the new school building located on Caton Avenue, and Pre-K-2 at our current building. The opening of both sites occured September 2015. Our growing population, which includes ELL’s and SWDs, as well as our projected expansion as we will our new site, are both accomplishments as well as a challenge moving forward. A number of strategic collaborations/partnerships /initiatives are being implemented at PS130, including, but not limited to: i) Further solidification of the split site for PS130. Importantly, in 2015/2016 we became a spilt site with a K-2 Early Childhood Campus at our existing site and a new 3-5 campus on Caton Ave. This initiative will encompass strategic expansion, while continuing to cater for all students’ needs in an effective and dynamic learning environment. We also partner closely with P53K and 15K839, which share our Caton Avenue site. ii) Responsive Classroom – Professional learning focus for all staff to build positive, supportive environment iii) Arts Connection iv) Chess in Schools v) Banks Street, Hunter College, Kingsborough and NYU student teachers vi) Carnegie Hall Program vii.) University Settlement 2018-19 CEP 10  viii.) Kids in the Game ix.) NYU's ASD Nest Support Project x.) Girls on the Run xi.) Music in the Brain 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Specific student populations within our school include: a) Students with learning needs b) English Language Learners with English as a second language 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our instructional focus for the 2018/2019 school year will build off of our instructional focus from 2017/2018: Providing goal-oriented feedback to students and families in order to move children to the next phases of the learning continuum in a given subject area. In 2017/2018, all teachers participated in professional learning sessions to develop a shared understanding of effective feedback. Teachers then worked in small groups focused on areas of particular interest in regards to giving feedback, such as using rubrics to give feedback on writing and providing families with feedback on children's math learning. An SLT sub-committee comprised of teachers and parents also worked together to establish methods for home/school communication about how students receive feedback on their work. In 2018/2019, teachers will set goals related to our instructional focus and meet in small groups with teachers who have similar goals in order to create action plans and support each other in meeting these goals. a) Rigorous Instruction Literacy Over the past five years our school has developed, and continues to revise and refine Social Studies and/or Science based integrated units of study in each grade. Our integrated units of study provide multiple entry points for learning to meet the varied learning needs of all students, especially students with special needs. We have aligned our units to the Understanding by Design model (UbD) and the CCLS. Rationale: ● Integrated Units of Study provide unique opportunities to meet the CCLS Standards recommendation for curriculum that prepares students for college, workforce training, and life in a technological society; “Students need the ability to gather, comprehend, evaluate, synthesize, and report on information and ideas, to conduct original research in order to answer questions or solve problems, and to analyze and create a high volume and extensive range of print and non-print texts in media forms old and new.” ● CCLS emphasizes fewer topics treated in greater depth. ● CCLS recommend “an equal emphasis on story and information-based reading and writing in the elementary grades. This opens the door for a greater focus on social studies and science during the school day. The shift is compatible with a project-based approach to social studies curriculum” 2018-19 CEP 11  ● Our special needs student population is increasing ( 25% English Language Learners, 19% Special Education students with Individualized Education Programs, 45% speak a language other than English at home). ● Student sub-groups (ELL students and SPED students) require multiple and varied entry points for learning, as well as for representing what they are learning and understanding. ● Conversation and discussion are needed to provide the necessary elaboration to master rules of use of words across contexts (Kowal & Swain, 1994) ● Meaningful contexts must be provided for functional use of language along with opportunities for practice and application (Dutro & Moran, 2003) Outcomes : ● Instruction delivered through integrated units of study will provide all students with (1) multiple means of representation, (2) multiple means of action and expression, and (3) multiple means of engagement. ● Through long-term, deep studies, and experiential learning, students will build and develop content rich vocabulary (Tier 2 and 3 vocabulary) in meaningful contexts ● Students will write for a variety of authentic audiences and purposes, using a variety of writing forms and genres in alignment with CCLS. ● Students’ content knowledge, and reading skills, will increase as they read rich, informational texts related to the studies - both independently and as shared text - in alignment with CCLS. ● Students’ speaking and listening skills will be strengthened as they engage in meaningful discussion around shared content. Specific Shifts in Integrated Units of Study: ● The CCLS specifically call for shifts in instruction that are attainable through deep, rigorous integrated units of study (Social Studies and/or Science based). “To be ready for college, workforce training, and life in a technological society, students need the ability to gather, comprehend, evaluate, synthesize, and report on information and ideas, to conduct original research in order to answer questions or solve problems, and to analyze and create a high volume and extensive range of print and non-print texts in media forms old and new. Emphasizes fewer topics treated in greater depth. An equal emphasis on story and information-based reading and writing in the elementary grades. This opens the door for a greater focus on social studies and science during the school day. The shift seems compatible with a project-based approach to social studies curriculum” ● Deep, rigorous, developmentally appropriate integrated units of study are in place across the grades spanning approximately 3-4 months ● Studies are project-based and inquiry-driven ● Multiple entry points for learners are explicitly planned for Students are reading and writing for authentic purposes using complex, content-based texts b) Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 CEP 12  Mathematics This year our Mathematics professional learning work centered on implementing and utilizing a "data wall" in order to focus on the learning trajectories of specific students. After looking at students strengths and needs, teachers planned for targeted and diagnostic assessments to further inform us about students' mathematical understandings and planned for differentiated instruction based based on these assessments. Grade level teacher teams engaged in lab site cycles focused on using assessment data to plan, implement and evaluate targeted and specific interventions within the Workshop Model as well as within Guided Math sessions. Ongoing analysis of assessments revealed students’ particular misconceptions and led to teachers developing more rigorous guided math plans that catered for the specific needs of learners in the classroom. “Looking at Student Work” sessions and coaching cycles also informed and further built the teachers’ capacity in implementing effective Math teaching and learning experiences. We also worked this year to refine each grade’s “Understanding by Design” units of work, adapting, rewriting and revising many units to ensure more rigorous alignment to the Common Core and State expectations. As well, this year we further refined our specific and targeted Cognitively Guided Instruction story problem focus as a daily routine across all K-5 classrooms with a focus on the CCLS Math Practice of “Modeling with Mathematics”. This has provided students’ with further opportunity to build strong Number Sense foundations as well as building their familiarity with all addition, subtraction, multiplication and division story problem types as recommended by the Common Core Learning Standards (NYS). High expectations have been further reinforced with the development of the PS130 Mathematics Teaching and Learning Handbook. We also created common digital tracking templates that allowed teachers to track student progress in basic fact automaticiy, student progressions through the phases of ECAM, and student mastery of the math CCLS over the course of the year. c) Collaborative Teachers Our teachers have continued to work within their grade level teams to achieve curriculum and assessment refinements. Professional learning has also been implemented within grade team meetings. The Professional Learning Team has consisted of a vertical team of teacher representatives from each grade level and has led a number of professional learning initiatives. One of these has included a very successful self-chosen “Book Study”, comprising mini-vertical teams discussing a professional text of their choice over a number of weeks. The Professional Learning team has also used digital surveys throughout the year in order to assess teacher and paraprofessional satisfaction with professional learning sessions and to gather input for planning future sessions. c) Supportive Environment This year has seen a very successful whole school focus on building positive and supportive learning environments through specific training for all staff in Responsive Classroom techniques. Teachers have worked to implement consistent and coherent classroom behavior management techniques. This has been evident during formal and informal observations and post-observation feedback to teachers has heightened strengths and progress in this area. Professional learning and coaching sessions with faculty from NYU's ASD Nest Support project has also helped teachers to create individualized behavior plans and implement positive behavioral modifications for children in need of additional supports. 2018/2019 also marked the inaugural meeting of PS130's Diversity and Equity committee, which now meets monthly and is comprised of faculty and parents. Six members of this team attended a training with Border Crossers, focused on discussing race in classrooms. The committee will continue to meet monthly and will look into further training for staff and parents related to race, ethnicity, gender, and ability differences. A key area of focus for the 2018/2019 school year will also be the development of a student council that will give students voice in issues that directly affect them, including recess decisions, choosing books for classroom libraries, and sustainability practices at the school. 2018-19 CEP 13  2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K130 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 832 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 18 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 40.0% % Attendance Rate 38.8% % Reduced Lunch 10.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 23.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 45.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 98 98 95.1% 0.1% 20.2% 6.9% 18.5% 5.8% 4 2% 8.1 62.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. *Conduct a comprehensive assessment of your school’s academic program Mathematics: The Elementary School Quality Snapshot (2016 ) indicates that with regards Mathematics Student Progress in Mathematics, all students made “Good” progress with the lowest performing students making “Good” progress, as well. The snapshot also indicated that with regards Mathematics Student Achievement, 46% of students met State Standards, with the average score being 2.9 out of 4.5. Literacy: The Elementary School Quality Snapshot (2016 ) indicates that with regards to Student Progress In Literacy all students made “Good” progress with the lowest performing students making “Good” progress, as well. The snapshot also indicated that with regards Literacy Student Achievement, 45 % of students met State Standards, with the average score being 2.8 out of 4.5. *Summarize your school’s strengths and needs relative to this element (in a narrative or bullet format), and identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan Literacy/Mathematics ● This year’s internal school data (reading running records, math performance tasks and diagnostic interviews), as well as last year’s State data indicates an ongoing need to further refine teachers’ understandings of whole school assessment practices, building both consistent professional judgments by all teachers and clear “bottom-line” PS130 assessment practices in Literacy and Math, as well as consistent practices for tracking student progress. ● Another need indicated by data is the ongoing analysis and use of assessment data to specifically differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all students, with an increasing need to provide extension opportunities for students who have mastered grade level standards. ● Professional learning of teacher teams needs to focus on: -Coaching the crafting of effective differentiated teaching and learning in the classroom 2018-19 CEP 16  -“Looking at Student Work” sessions needed to focus on using data to drive more specific and targeted intervention daily and on giving students action, goal-oriented feedback -Planning for differentiated instruction based on assessment data in various components of balanced literacy and math instruction -Consistency in implementation across classrooms ● Need to continue to build teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge of most effective strategies for catering for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities in Literacy and Math instruction, including teachers of ICT classrooms and other providers ● Professional learning with external consultants/coaches also needs to focus on building teachers’ content knowledge in using assessment data to refine effective CCLS aligned Math/Literacy pedagogy to meet the needs of ALL learners, particularly ELL’s and SWD’s Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of K-5 grade level teachers will: a) implement cohesive practices in reading and writing within Readers’ and Writers’ Workshops and integrated units, with a particular focus on the development of writing traits, rigorous vocabulary instruction and the development of comprehension strategies in reading as indicated by a 3% increase in meeting proficiency on 2019 State ELA results; b) increase levels of rigorous, data-informed differentiation in Mathematics to meet the needs of all learners with the implementation of the new Investigations 3 curriculum, with a particular focus on targeted intervention, as indicated by a 3% increase in meeting proficiency on 2019 State Math results. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). a ) Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher teams b) Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher Teams Literacy/Mathematics Curriculum:  Implement CCLS aligned Literacy/ Investigations 3 Mathematics curriculum, embedded in Balanced Literacy and Balanced Mathematics practices- with a focus on providing more effective teacher feedback  Rigorous Balanced Literacy Components evident in each classroom: Guided Reading, Shared Text, Read-Alouds, Independent Reading, Modeled Writing, Independent Writing, Word Study/ implementation of K-2 Fundations  Rigorous Balanced Mathematics instruction evident in every classroom: Tiered differentiated Workshop Model lessons, Guided Math using assessment to inform groupings of students and appropriate activities, CCLS aligned Exemplars problem solving, Number Talks, Cognitively Guided Instruction story problems  Teachers utilize assessment information to inform daily intervention through Balanced Literacy/Mathematics components eg tiered lessons in Mathematics/Guided Math/and data informed Guided Reading groups/Shared Text sessions  Time scheduled with Literacy Coach/Consultants and Math Consultant for developing next steps Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher teams/Professional Learning Team/Math Consultant Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher Teams/Professional Learning Team/ Studies Consultant/Literacy Consultant Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher teams/Professional Learning Team/ Studies Consultant/Literacy Consultant July 2018-June 2019 July 2018-June 2019 July 2018-June 2019 July 2018-June 2019 July 2018-June 2019 July 2018 June 2019 Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach/AIS Teacher (Reading)/Reading Recovery Teacher/Professional Learning Team Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach/AIS Teacher (Reading)/Reading Recovery Teacher/Professional Learning Team Principal/Assistant Principal/ Teacher/Professional Learning Team Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach/AIS Teacher (Reading)/Reading Recovery Teacher Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach/ Professional Learning Team Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy 2018-19 CEP 18 Coach /Professional Learning Team within Balanced Literacy/Math components, use of data during conferring, planning units of work and accounting for all students’ needs through differentiated activities, including students who need extension activities  Teachers work in grade level teams to review units of study before they begin, in order to develop common expectations for work over the course of the unit and to adjust curriculum maps and assessments to align to Balanced Literacy/Balanced Mathematics Small group strategy/Guided Reading/Guided Math lessons utilizing data to meet specific instructional needs of students  ICT Consultant Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher teams/ Professional Learning Team/ Technology Teacher/Technology consultant Assessment  Revise Whole School Assessment Frameworks in Literacy embedding revised, rigorous tasks and rubrics aligned and embed RtI assessment types- Universal Screening and Progress Monitoring  Teacher led re-development of Whole School Mathematics Assessment Framework with the implementation of Investigations 3, including formative, summative, diagnostic, self assessments within each marking period, establishing minimum "bottom-line" assessment expectations with each teacher team so as to a) inform teaching, b) monitor student progress and c) report to parents  Teacher Teams to check for rigor of all assessment tasks using Webb’s Depth of Knowledge  Teacher Teams to collaboratively look at student work with protocols, revise and monitor assessment frameworks, and engage in professional learning focused on using the data to inform instructional decisions prior to units of work o Particular emphasis on refining, implementing and monitoring diagnostic assessments. Meetings with teacher teams to discuss implications of this data in regards to specific teaching and learning experiences  Embed these refined assessments in the new CCLS aligned yearly overview curriculum map  Professional Development team to work with administrators and consultants to develop systems for providing more effective and consistent feedback to students and families b) Mathematics 2018-19 CEP 19   Collaboratively develop, implement and monitor data-informed professional learning action plan for K-5 Math consultancy to ensure alignment to annual school goals/school and MOTP data and focus on data-informed effective teaching and learning of Mathematics with the implementation of Mathematics curriculum, Investigations 3  Professional Learning sessions focused on Inquiry Work to address needs of SWD and ELL students, involving analysis of data, development and implementation of Math intervention plans to meet the needs of all learners  Teacher leaders to revise “PS130 Math Handbook  of Effective Teaching and Learning in Mathematics” (introduced in 2014/2015) to clarify high expectations, particularly with introduction of new Math curriculum Further embed K-5 CCLS aligned Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) story problems twice week with a focus on CCLS Math Practice of “Modeling with Mathematics”, to build deep understanding, fluency and coherency with reading, understanding, solving and representing all varieties of word problems. Ensure consistency of implementation through further professional learning regarding Bar Models/Tape Diagrams to unpack problems  Refine Number Talks further with a focus on Math Practice of “Modeling with Mathematics”, modeling the representation of students’ strategies as well as embedding various questioning and discussion techniques Example: Talk Moves to build student engagement and participation  K-5 teachers to continue to embed one integrated STEM unit aligned to both Math & Science standards  K-5 teachers to continue administering fact fluency interviews, providing students with leveled games to build fact fluency, tracking student progress monthly, and using "extended" fact interviews once children have mastered all addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division facts  Continue to implement Family Fridays with a focus on practical, hands-on family friendly Math activities to support students’ learning of Math at home and build parents’ knowledge of CCLS Mathematics content  Mathematics data wall sessions with math consultant in order to look closely at specific needs of students (for both intervention and extension) and to carefully plan guided math activities designed to target these needs 2018-19 CEP 20   Continued collaboration with Columbia University graduate students providing targeted small group mathematics intervention to groups of students identified via digital data tracking documents c) Literacy  Collaboratively develop a professional development plan to support teachers in planning and implementing reading and writing units of study, including those which are embedded within integrated units of study. o Administration, literacy coach and social studies consultant to support teachers through co-planning, demonstration lessons in all components of balanced literacy, student conferences and opportunities for intervisitation o Literacy PD also to include time to analyze student work in order to adjust unit plans prior to the beginning of each unit of study o Teachers to continue refining practices in word study (K-2: Fundations, 3-5: teacher-developed word study inquiries and spelling instruction)  Maintain units and curricular calendars in the shared Google Drive, to ensure cohesive teaching and timing of units  Work with Special Education consultant to refine lesson plans in order to ensure explicit teaching with demonstration and active student engagement, in support of more purposeful differentiation  Administration, literacy coach and teacher teams to work toward clearer vertical alignment in literacy curriculum maps  Continue to build and maintain classroom libraries to ensure variety of text types and levels, as well as books representing diverse characters and topics  Review and update the PS 130 Literacy Best Practices Guide  Continue to provide reading intervention for students, with a focus on getting students reading on grade level by the end of second grade. Reading Recovery, Reading Rescue, and Orton-Gillingham will all be options for intervention and children will be selected for these programs based on specific skills they need to develop in order to progress toward grade level. Training more special education teachers (from ICT classrooms) in Orton-Gillingham is a priority for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 21  d) Social Studies/Science  K-5 grade level teacher teams to continue to revise, refine and evaluate the social studies and/or science based integrated units of study to ensure multiple entry points for learning to meet the varied needs of all students, especially students with special needs, as well as ensuring alignment to the Universal Design for Learning model (UDL) and CCLS  Teachers to continue to coordinate with parent art committee and collaborate with teachers of the arts to integrate arts instruction with social studies and science integrated units of study  K-5 teachers to include domain-specific vocabulary in unit plans and use this vocabulary to help students develop "study word walls" with definitions and images. Teachers will encourage and monitor use of this vocabulary in student writing and discussions.  K-2 teachers will align blockroom builds with integrated units of study; teachers will continue to add to these plans and include relevant vocabulary and discussion prompts to them. e) Technology  Technology consultant to continue to support technology teacher in a) development of lessons, b) documenting and vertically aligning lessons, c) organizing and vertically aligning the K-5 Scope and Sequence, d) strategize on technical support challenges.  Teacher teams to maintain units and add new materials to Google Drive to ensure cohesive implementation and shared access  Professional Learning sessions with a technology consultant tailored to teacher’s identified needs  Teacher teams working with a technology consultant and the literacy coach to develop systems for documenting student learning processes. f) ICT   ICT consultant to work with ICT teacher teams focused on differentiating instruction and providing social/emotional supports for students with IEP's. ICT consultant and administration to provide coaching and support to ICT teams about different co-teaching models and when/how to apply these models 2018-19 CEP 22 Teacher Teams/ Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach /Professional Learning Team  ICT consultant will also work with cluster teachers and general education teachers in order to provide support with differentiating instruction and meeting behavioral needs of students with IEPs.  As noted in the Literacy portion, Orton-Gillingham training is a priority for special education teachers in ICT classrooms, in order to provide another tool for helping children with learning disabilities to progress toward grade level in reading. Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. Teacher Teams/Parents/ Students July 2018-June 2019 -End of unit Monitoring Progress and self-assessment sheets to go home to parents after each unit of work to inform student progress -Studies Celebrations- sharing and celebrating work achieved -Class websites informing parents of current units of work and Common Core Standards -Streamlining of teacher process for uploading to class websites -Monthly newsletters from grade teams informing families about current units of study in all subject areas -Addition of "Homework workshop" to curriculum night in order to help parents understand the purpose of homework and provide appropriate support to students when completing homework -Creation and distribution of parent materials about math fact automaticity, explaining the school-wide philopophy, assessment practices, and progression of related games -Creation of "Home Support Resources" folder on the Google Drive with resources for teachers to give to parents, based on student needs and levels 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 23  -End of unit Monitoring Progress and self-assessment sheets to go home to parents after each unit of work to inform student progress -Studies Celebrations- sharing and celebrating work achieved -Class websites informing parents of current units of work and Common Core Standards -Streamlining of teacher process for uploading to class websites -Monthly newsletters from grade teams informing families about current units of study in all subject areas -Addition of "Homework workshop" to curriculum night in order to help parents understand the purpose of homework and provide appropriate support to students when completing homework -Creation and distribution of parent materials about math fact automaticity, explaining the school-wide philopophy, assessment practices, and progression of related games -Creation of "Home Support Resources" folder on the Google Drive with resources for teachers to give to parents, based on student needs and levels Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Literacy Coach, Literacy/Studies Consultants, Math Consultant, Technology Consultant, Technology Cluster Teacher Instructional Resources : PS 130 CCLS aligned curriculum and assessment documents, PS 130 Math Teaching and Learning Handbook, Classroom libraries and materials, PS130 Literacy Best Practices Handbook Schedule Adjustments: Common Preps scheduled, Lab sites for professional learning scheduled for Math and Literacy/Social Studies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following progress monitoring is detailed on our “PS130 Progress Monitoring Checklist for 2018/2019” and includes: PS130 K-5 Literacy Mid Point benchmark 2018-19 CEP 24  By February 2019, students will attain the following mid-point benchmarks on "Fountas and Pinnell Independent Reading Level Benchmarks", Grade K: C Grade 1: H Grade 2: L Grade 3: O Grade 4: R Grade 5: U PS130 K-5 Mathematics Mid Point benchmark By January 2019,students will have progressed one phase on Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics interview or 2 strategy levels on the appropriate Diagnostic Interview. Data from these diagnostics and end of unit Investigation 3 Math quizzes is utilized to inform intervention during daily lessons and Guided Math sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Literacy Instrument of Measure: Fountas and Pinnell benchmarks as per "PS130 Independent Reading Benchmarks Overview" for three marking periods for Grades K-5. Literacy. Mid Point measure as indicated on "PS130 Independent Reading Benchmarks Overview" (Marking Period 2) Mathematics Instrument of Measure: Investigations 3 end of unit quizzes/diagnostic assessments of Basic Facts/Early Childhood Assessment in Mathematics as indicated on "PS130 Mathematics Yearly Assessment Overview" by marking period. Mid Point measure as indicated on "PS130 Mathematics Yearly Assessment Overview" (Marking Period 2) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Quality School Guide 2016/17 indicated a Supportive environment score of 4.16. In the School Survey for 2016/2017, 85% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. 81% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. 96% of teachers who teach students in grades pre-k through 5 agreed or strongly agreed that their students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria of their school and 100% of teachers who teach students in grades pre-k through 5 agreed or strongly agreed that their students are safe in their class(es). Furthermore, 92% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). Our work from 2015-2017 in Responsive Classroom Professional Learning for all staff to ensure cohesive and coherent behavior management practices across the school has impacted student behavior in classrooms and throughout the school. It has also helped to build consistent language and practices amongst all school staff, including school aides and paraprofessionals. In 2017/2018, we hope to strengthen this work by sending teachers to Responsive Classroom workshops on targeted topics, such as "Managing Challenging Behaviors" and special workshops for cluster area teachers. We also will continue sending teachers to the Responsive Classroom "Advanced Course", which addresses topics such as academic choice and building student independence and leadership. This will help address survey areas noted above that had scores in the 80% range. We will also continue to work with the ASD Nest Support Project on behavioral supports and inclusive behavioral modifications. Our guidance counselors will also continue teaching staff, students, and parents about mindfulness and self-regulation strategies. Furthermore, the development of our Equity and Diversity Committee and our Student Council will give voice to staff, students and parents about topics related to creating a supportive environment. ● Our analysis revealed concern of teachers in 2016/2017 was developing student independence and leadership. ● Our analysis of data reveals that while we have achieved much more consistency in behavior management strategies and positive supportive climates within classrooms and the school, we need to continue this work. This is particularly important with our split site occurring in 2015/2016 and the need for coherency and consistency in building a positive school culture across two buildings now is maintained. (Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers) ● Need to ensure Level 1 training for new teachers to school ● We needed to continue to build teachers’ and parents’ shared understandings of effective proactive and positive behavior management techniques, to develop “responsive classrooms” in every classroom in our school. This is 2018-19 CEP 26  important for new teachers and new parents to our school as well as reinforcing our work of 2016/2017 in building “responsive classrooms” in every PS130 classroom. (Supportive Environment) ● Need to continue student leadership forums (Supportive Environment) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Supportive Environment: Annual Goal By June 2019, all teachers will participate in professional learning on equity and culturally responsive teaching with the focus being on continuing to develop and scaffold each child’s social/emotional development, as evidenced by an increase to 98% on the “cultural awareness and inclusive classroom indicator” on the NYC School Survey 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach/Responsive Classroom training personnel a)Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher teams/ Professional Learning Team b)Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Continue reinforcing consistent school-wide positive behavior management strategies, focused on each classroom as well as for outside-classroom behaviors- utilizing research-based "Responsive Classroom" practices  Ongoing Professional Learning in "Responsive Classroom" techniques for each classroom/cluster teacher/ paraprofessional (see Professional Learning Plan)  Coaching for all new staff members in Responsive Classroom from lead teachers  Training for experienced teachers in Responsive  Classroom Level II Follow-Up with implementation school-wide through actionable feedback during informal and formal observations  Book Studies with teachers using texts related to mindfulness, Responsive Classroom, and culturally responsive teaching practices  Paras and teachers trained in Mindfulness Practices  Guidance Officers implementing Mindfulness Practices with students at-risk  Create and distribute "Best Practices in Responsive Classroom" and "Best Practice for Behavior Management and Self-regulation" guide for all staff  Continue to refine, revise and monitor behavior management practices to ensure common shared understanding and practices  Train early-childhood teachers in writing "social stories" to help children learn school routines and procedures; train upper grade teachers in "social article" writing to Training dates as per professional learning calendar Coaching new teachers by September 2018 *Book study group to begin 2018-19 CEP 28 October, monthly meetings October-May *Paras trained in mindfulness practices September-May Parents and Teachers Parent Coordinator/ Principal/ Assistant Principal/Teachers help address social/emotional topics of concern to upper grade students  Develop "case conferencing" protocol for developing action plans and assessing progress of students requiring behavioral intervention  Provide "strengths and interests" training to all staff in order help staff build positive relationships with students  Communication with parents- expectations- parents’ roles and responsibilities, model class meeting at first parent teacher conference  Continued meeting of school's Equity and Diversity Committee in order to decide upon trainings about culturally responsive practices for staff and parents and to develop shared language about race, ethnicity, gender, and ability differences  Development of a "Student Council" for students to bring ideas and concerns to school leadership c ) Engaging families and supporting their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home.  Workshops on Responsive Classroom Practices for Parents Sharing of meditation techniques at family events   Parent workshops on topics related to equity and  diversity, as decided by the Diversity and Equity Committee Individual parent meetings/communication as needed with teachers and school leadership to review behavior intervention plans for students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Sharing of meditation techniques at family events  Workshops on Responsive Classroom Practices for Parents   Parent workshops on topics related to equity and diversity, as decided by the Diversity and Equity Committee Individual parent meetings/communication as needed with teachers and school leadership to review behavior  intervention plans for students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 29  Human Resources : Responsive Classroom trainers; trainers from organizations focused on Culturally Responsive Pedagogy Instructional resources : Responsive Classroom texts Schedule adjustments - Professional Learning organized for new teachers, allocation of professional learning through day for those teachers, paraprofessionals, cluster teachers unable to attend initial year’s training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following progress monitoring is detailed on our “PS130 Progress Monitoring Checklist for 2018/2019” and includes: ● By January 2019, 97% of teachers will respond with a rating of effective or higher to questions about cultural awareness and inclusive teaching practices on a mid-year survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year professional learning survey - January 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. *Conduct a comprehensive assessment of your school’s academic program The School quality Snapshot for 2017-2017 gave our school an excellent rating in the area of COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS. On the school survey from 2016-2017, 92% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, teachers design instructional programs (e.g. lessons, units) together. 81% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. In regards to professional development, 85% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated. 83% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. However, only 51% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. * Summary and Identification of Priority Needs: This data indicates need to continue to build coherent and consistent structures for professional development; professional development also needs to continue to take teacher feedback into account. Academic data (noted in rigorous instruction section) also indicates need to continue to focus on differentiation, particularly for ELL’s, SWD’s, Lowest Performing sub groups, and children in need of extension. The Quality Review from 2014/2015 also indicated a need to develop teacher's abilities to give targeted, goal-oriented feedback to students - which is was our instructional focus for 2017-2018 and will continue to be our focus in 2018-2019. In 2017-2018, we used professional learning time to build a common understanding of effective feedback and then broke into smaller vertical groups focused on areas of teacher interest related to giving feedback to students and families. The above data indicates a continued need for sustained, coherent professional learning experiences; continued work on this instructional focus, as well as opportunities for book clubs and grade-team collaboration on curriculum modification, differentiation, and assessment analysis. Common planning time also helps to address the latter need, which is built into the school's schedule. Driven by the teacher led professional learning team, we also will continue to focus on utilizing teacher teams (grade level and vertical) to build shared understandings of effective differentiation across content areas and further build teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge. Finally, the above data indicates a need for more opportunities for teachers to collaborate across schools; this work began in 2016-2017 and the professional learning team will continue to research and implement related opportunities in the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Collaborative Teachers: Annual Goal By June 2019, 100% of teaching staff will work in teams to look at student work and assessments (formative and summative) in order to provide rigorous feedback to students, as evidenced by a 3% increase on the NYC School Survey measure of “Innovation and Collective Responsibility”. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Learning Team to lead Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher teams/ Professional Learning Team the planning of all professional learning aligned to each of CEP goals  Monday professional learning of Principal/Assistant Principal/Teacher Teams/Cluster Teacher Teams/ Professional Learning Team/Literacy Coach/ AIS Reading teacher/ Reading Recovery teacher Team teacher teams focused on “Looking at Student Work” and "Feedback" sessions, using data to drive more specific and targeted intervention, extension and feedback. These cycles will be determined by teachers’ analysis of data and student work in Literacy and Math to build efficacy and teacher empowerment in decision-making in professional learning.  Book Clubs to continue, focusing on building all teachers’ content and pedagogical knowledge and cultural competency.  Work in grade level teams to build understandings of: 1.) using literacy data (eg running records) to inform next steps in targeted and effective literacy instruction to best meet the specific needs of all students 2.) using math diagnostic, formative and summative data to inform next steps in targeted and effective math instruction to best meet the specific needs of all students  Work in vertical teams analyzing student work and parent communication and giving targeted, Principal/Assistant Principal/Literacy Coach/ Professional Learning Team/AIS Reading teacher/ Reading Recovery teacher/ External consultancies to implement as specified/ September 2018-June 2019 Principal/Assistant Principal/Professional Learning Team 2018-19 CEP 33  September 2018-June 2019 Mid year review of CEP- Staff- January goal-oriented feedback based on this analysis  Professional learning with external consultancies (Social Studies, Technology, ICT, Math) and internal coaches (Literacy coach and APs) focused on building teachers’ content knowledge and crafting effective pedagogy to meet the needs of ALL learners, particularly ELL’s and SWD’s.  Continue professional development support for Special Education teachers (Integrated Co-Teaching Teams, paraprofessionals, and support providers) in order to strengthen instruction and improve outcomes for Students With Disabilities (SWD’s)  Professional Learning Team will develop surveys to assess teacher professional learning needs, wants, and proposed changes to professional learning schedule throughout the year Surveys will also be used to determine topics for vertical study groups focused on feedback-related topics   Opportunities for inter-school collaborations will include bird study inter-visitation in grade 2, choice-time inter-visitation in grade K, social-emotional learning partnership with other D15 schools, special cluster Arts Monday collaborations and inter-school PE group. The professional learning committee will be consulted in regards to other opportunities for inter-school collaboration. Inclusion program with co-located school P53 will provide inter-school professional learning and collaboration opportunities between PS130 upper school teachers and P53's support providers and special education providers.   Collaboration between teachers and paraprofessionals in planning, implementing, and refining Reading Rescue program 2018-19 CEP 34 Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement Grade level Teacher Teams/Cluster Teams/Parents/Principal/APs September2018 /June 2019 Principal/assistant Principal/Professional Learning Team  Grade teams to plan collaboratively for Family Fridays to share current teaching and learning experiences and processes.  Each teacher within grade team to send home monitoring progress sheets to parents  Class websites- informing parents of   class activities School website SLT sub-committee focused on instructional conversations between teachers and parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement  Grade teams to plan collaboratively for Family Fridays to share current teaching and learning experiences and processes.  Each teacher within grade team to send home monitoring progress sheets to parents  Class websites- informing parents of class activities   School website SLT sub-committee focused on instructional conversations between teachers and parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Instructional Coach, Literacy Consultants, Math Consultant, Technology Consultant, Technology Cluster Instructional Resources : PS 130 CCLS aligned curriculum and assessment documents, PS 130 Math Teaching and Learning Handbook, Rubrics from Danielson’s Teaching Effectiveness Framework, NYCDOE Professional Learning Handbook, Book club books for professional learning sessions, Reading Rescue collaboration and materials Schedule adjustments : Common Preps scheduled, Lab sites for professional learning scheduled for Math and Literacy/Social Studies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 35  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following progress monitoring is detailed on our Progress Monitoring Checklist for 2016/2017: ● By January 2019, positive responses from teachers related to innovation and collective responsibility on our mid-year professional learning survey will increase by 1.5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 - Mid-year professional learning survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Conduct a comprehensive assessment of your school’s academic program The Quality School Guide and snapshot 2016: The School Quality Snapshot from 2017/2017 rated the school as "Good" in regards to school leadership. Responses from teachers on the Learning Environment Survey indicated that teachers feel that there are clear instructional expectations coming from school leaders and that teachers have a voice in strategic decision making; however, there is still a need for further involvement and awareness of strategic decision-making, especially in regards to setting standards for student behavior. On the 2017/2017 school survey, 92% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 85% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of developing instructional materials and 79% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of setting standards for student behavior. Teacher leadership has been steeped in a history of ongoing development at PS130 and there is a need to refine these processes further to maximize teacher involvement and efficacy. In 2014/2015 we established the Professional Learning Team and empowered them to lead strategic planning; this team will continue in the 2018/2019 school year. On the school survey, parent responses were largely positive in regards to school leadership and families have voice in leadership decisions. 95% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader encourages feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parent/guardian and teacher leaders. Summary of School’s Strengths and Needs  Continue to build school culture through collaborative decision-making and empowering further teacher leadership; provide opportunities for teacher input in creating behavior plans and positive incentive systems for students in need Continue to document phases of building teacher leadership at K130 with teachers, offering opportunities for leadership within the school and at other schools Continue working with the professional learning team to create a distributive leadership structure that empowers teachers to take a pro-active role in instructional decisions and professional learning decisions   2018-19 CEP 37  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective Leadership: Annual Goal : By June 2019, varied distributive leadership structures will be established with a focus on empowering teacher leadership, as evidenced by the NYC School Survey measure of “Teacher Influence” increasing by 3%. 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Continue to refine processes of teacher leadership within Professional Learning Team- clarify roles and responsibilities, develop norms for meetings and work, document teacher leadership processes in strategic planning/decision-making, moving to Phase 2 of Strategic Planning Processes led by Professional Learning Team (vertical teacher team)  Annual August meeting to enable Professional Learning Team the opportunity to engage in whole school strategic decision-making, based on “Framework for Great Schools” (NYCDOE) components. Strategies developed to share with all staff for feedback  Grade Level Teacher Teams- every team to establish norms for working together collaboratively on Monday and Tuesday professional learning time, monitoring professional learning cycles and adjusting/adapting as needed  Professional Learning Teacher Team to lead development of whole school proactive plan, embedding Responsive Classroom Practices and empowering teacher leadership in strategic decision making  Consultation with professional learning team on topics for vertical inquiry groups, vertical book clubs, individualized teacher PD plans, and to consider opportunities for partnerships with other schools  Use of Google Forms to solicit teacher input on which professional learning sessions interest them and are relevant to their work  Teacher-led vertical inquiry groups, book clubs, and content specific sessions during Monday PD (including sessions led by cluster teachers)  Teacher-led committees and initiatives to address school-wide issues of importance to teachers and students - such as wellness, equity and diversity, gender identity, and enrichment clubs Professional Learning Team June 2018-June 2019 Professional Learning Team Grade level teacher Teams Behavior Management Team Principal/Assistant Principal Professional Learning Team Grade level teacher Teams Professional Learning Team/Guidance counselors August 2018 meeting Ongoing meetings 2018/ 2019 2018-19 CEP 39  Mid-year and end-of-year surveys for teachers in order to be used in strategic decision-making  Experienced teachers will mentor new teachers to 130 and use logs to record sessions and next steps; logs can be accessed by school leaders for reference when observing and giving feedback to new teachers Teachers/Coaches/ Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -SLT quarterly newsletter from school leadership to families -Posting of SLT minutes for families to view -Addition of SLT page, with information about sub-committees - to school website -Monthly school leadership updates at PTA meetings given by principals and APs -Quarterly letters from school administration to families, highlighting student achievements and school initiatives Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources : Professional Learning Team/ Grade level teacher teams/ Behavior Management Team Instructional Resources : Professional learning Handbook, Setting norms and protocols for Inquiry work information, Responsive Classroom Course texts Schedule adjustments : Organize Behavior Management Professional Learning for new teachers/staff and ongoing learning required for teachers trained last year- venue/facilitation etc Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The following progress monitoring is detailed on our Progress Monitoring Checklist for 2019/2019: 2018-19 CEP 40  January 2019: Professional Learning Team’s Mid Year Survey will show an increase of 1.5% in positive responses from teachers on questions related to "teacher influence". Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PS130 Professional Learning Team’s Mid Year Survey and NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. * Conduct a comprehensive assessment of your school’s academic program ● 2016 School Environment Survey indicated that 91% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn and 94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school and 94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. 88% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often and 91% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance, sports event, or science fair). Summary of Strengths and Needs  Need to deepen our communication with parents- consider deepening use of technology, parent engagement sessions with teachers on Tuesday afternoons, monthly Family Fridays  Continued communication considerations with a split-site school site and ensuring clear transparent communication with parents and community for whole school across two sites  Need to ensure continued strong communication with parents of at-risk students to form trusting, respectful relationships both focused on improving student outcomes academically, socially and emotionally  Need to deepen and clarify communication around opportunities to volunteer at the school, participate in events, and attend meetings Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strong Family/Community Ties: Annual Goal : By June 2019, parents at PS130 will be empowered to create collaborative groups that increase participation in, and support school wide initiatives to ensure coherence and clear communication across both school sites, as evidenced by a 5% increase in parent volunteers across school groups. 2018-19 CEP 42  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Continue implement monthly Family Fridays at both school sites and established by grade level and school wide teacher teams PS130 students, staff & parents September 2018-June 2019 PS130 Staff and administrators ● Continued partnerships with community organizations, including local universities sending student teachers to the school ● Parent Coordinator/Curriculum Teas/Classroom Visits/Class Parent breakfast/Parent Appreciation Day breakfast ● Collaboratively work to establish /continue increased number of specific Parent Committees eg Gardening, Fifth Grade, Music, Nutrition, Enrichment ● Collaborate with parents in marketing school “One 30, One School”, particularly cognizant of new split site, including new school song ● Curriculum night- all teachers to model Class Meetings with Parents as introduction to Responsive Classroom and include education about homework purpose and best practices ● Building walk through with SLT And PTA executive board (approx. 10 parents) to share effective instruction in building and to ground parents in the reality of our practice in core instructional model – witness first hand implementation of integrated units/ Math instruction/ ESL/ resource room/OT and PT /Orton Gillingham/ Reading Recovery ● Technology cluster and technology consultant to lead the ongoing updating of the PS 130 website to ensure greater communication with parents electronically, incorporating variety of multi-media tools ● Class webpages for every class, maintained and regularly updated with current curriculum focus, class celebratory activities, parent invitations etc. 2018-19 CEP 43  ● Parents involved in/informed of decision-making processes with students with IEP’s: programming adaptations, IEP goals and achievements, and involved in planning next steps ● Close liaison with parents to monitor each student’s progress ● Ongoing progress monitoring meetings through year, including summer planning meetings during May PTC ● Build student leadership further through implementing (and continued development of) student- developed school newspaper “ The Parkside News" ● Develop and implement CCLS Family Math Progress Reports ● Ongoing parent engagement with new 3-5 school site K437 ● In response to parents’ requests, increase number of academic parent workshops, including homework, math, and social studies ● Increase number of workshops specifically for parents of children with IEP’s ● Multi-layered Parent workshops (linked to annual goals)-Volunteer training (2 workshops for parents to become parent volunteers), Spanish-speaking families meeting, Technology workshops, 3 open houses for Kindergarten and pre-k families, every month parent breakfast with principal and PTA recap, Middle School (2 sessions), K437 – Middle School options with new school, new Positive Behavior Management- Responsive Classroom, ELA Parent workshop, Math Parent workshop, Science PD  Parent "Book of the month" sessions inviting parents to listen to and discuss picture books being read to all students in both lower and upper school libraries 3b – Parent and Family Engagement August 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator Principal, assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent Committees If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PS130 PTA sub-committee, including garden committee, grants committee, fundraising committee, art committee and music committee, afterschool committee Parent communication surveys to be reviewed by SLT 2018-19 CEP 44  Univsersity Settlement Student Teachers from NYU, Hunter, Bank Street, and Kingsborough Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Parent Coordinator, parent volunteers, Learning Leaders, Community Resources, Instructional Resources: Technology cluster/technology coordinator with parent coordinator regarding website, Schedule Adjustments : Close liaison with parent coordinator to organize schedule of workshops, breakfasts, - organization of all other breakfasts/meetings/curriculum teas/class celebrations on school-wide calendar for transparent communication Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 - as evidenced by reviewing sign-ins from parent workshops and PTA committee meetings, parent participation levels will increase by 2.5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets and meeting notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 45  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELA formative and summative assessments are used to determine eligible students for AIS intervention services Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) For students in K, first and second we offer F & P Literacy Intervention Program, Reading Rescue, Reading Recovery and Orton-Gillingham Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group and one-to-one tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Intervention services are offered both during the day as a pull out program and afterschool. For students in grades three, four and five we offer F & P Literacy intervention program, Wilson, and Orton-Gillingham Number Talks, Cognitive Guided Instruction story problems, Guided Math, Teachers College Math Intervention Fourth grade Science curriculum and FOSS Kits Intervention services are offered to students in small group setting Intervention services are offered after school Intervention services are offered to students in small group setting Intervention services are provided to fourth grade students after school Mathematics Science Math formative, summative and diagnostic assessments are used to determine eligible students for AIS intervention services ELA formative and summative assessments are used to determine eligible students for AIS intervention services Social Studies 2018-19 CEP 46  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPC committee recommendation, Teacher recommendation Counseling Intervention services are offered one to one or small group Intervention Services are provided during school 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 76 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are currently providing students with counseling services both at the upper and lower school. Interventions range from one to one counseling, group as well as mediation and lunch clubs Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 48  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have long been committed to teacher leadership and empowering a collaborative professional learning community which has resulted in high teacher retention rate. Our teacher candidates are recommended by school staff, parents, consultants and colleges. We have a tree tier interview process: Candidate is first interviewed by administration, we follow up with a demonstration lesson and finally candidate is interviewed by our hiring committee. We promote retention by offering all our teachers professional growth opportunities both in house, through consultancy and teacher teams as well as Professional Development from outside organizations, inter visitations, and more. Administration also encourages teacher initiative in pursuing self-selected professional learning opportunities. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). This year, professional learning at PS130 will exemplify the principles and guidelines in “ A Handbook for Professional Learning: Research, Resources, and Strategies for Implementation” (NYCDOE) A range of professional learning designs will be utilized, including: i) Studying student work ii) Analyzing teacher feedback iii) Professional book study iv) Online courses v Seminars/trainings & conferences vi) Professional Learning Opportunities for Collaborative Planning for Curriculum, 2018-19 CEP 50  Instruction & Assessment a)Curriculum mapping b) Analysis of curricula across grades c) Integrated curriculum planning d) Curriculum adaptation planning e) Planning specific instructional strategies across the curriculum f) Planning common assessments vii) Lesson study viii) Professional Learning Opportunities for Coaching and Peer Observations to Refine and Sustain Learning a) Peer or collegial mentoring b) Inter-visitation and intra-visitation c) Video sharing of lessons d)Mentoring student teachers/graduate students e) Coaching, scaffolding/mentoring ix ) Professional Learning Opportunities for Making Learning Public a) Writing & publishing reports on learning through blogs and other platforms b) Presenting work to internal & external groups c) Creating & analyzing portfolios d) Designing & implementing PL workshops e) Sharing adult learning with students’ families Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 51  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre-K curriculum is aligned with the rest of the school, Pre-K teachers participate in school wide professional development and students participate in all school wide activities and services available at the school. Pre-K parents also participate in all school wide activities, classroom activities and are welcome to become class parents and volunteers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our assessment selections have changed organically. For the past 10 years we have selected and performed math and literacy assessments. Teachers analyzed the results of the assessments and communicated their need to change them because the assessments we had did not fully evaluate well our students’ learning and did not align to our curriculum and standards. For literacy we used TC running records and writing on demand, in math we used the Every Day Math end of unit assessment Currently our teachers have selected and use F & P Benchmark reading assessment and we are currently learning to use First Steps writing continuum to analyze student writing. In math we are currently using ECAM, Exemplars, end of unit tasks as well as addition, subtraction, multiplication, division interview sheets and Cognitive Guided Instruction word problems. In the words of one of our teachers, our assessment model has grown out of trial and error; seeing which assessments align with our instructional focus, what the assessments teach us about student learning, and provide the basis for next steps. Using Assessment to Adjust Instructional Goals and Professional Development Goals: ● Writing Instruction: Consistent feedback from the PD Committee, teacher teams, and assessments highlight the need for a school-wide focus on writing instruction. This is evidenced by student work samples across the grades, and in conversations with grade representatives on the PD Committee, as well as with individual teachers in their IPC conferences. We have hired a writing consultant who will work in cycles of 5 days with teacher teams in a lab site format, with our aim being to develop cohesive practices around looking at student writing to inform instruction. ● Reading Assessments: We moved from TC benchmarks assessments to F&P Assessments after purchasing the F&P Literacy Intervention Kits for all grades for use in Guided Reading instruction. Beginning in 2012, one of our instructional focuses was Guided Reading. Extensive professional development in the use of the LLI kits, as well as in 2018-19 CEP 52  the F&P Benchmark Assessments was provided to all grade teams by our in-house Literacy Coach over the course of two years (grade teams meetings, 1-1 coaching and demonstration, curriculum and assessment documents outlining specific protocols and procedures). Formative assessments are conducted throughout the year in the form of Guided Reading observational notes, as well as Independent Reading Conferences during which modified running records are taken on children’s reading behaviors. The impact of this work to date is evidenced in the instructional shifts in the Reading Workshop. In addition to focused mini-lessons on reading strategies and skills, teachers plan for guided reading groups each day, in addition to purposeful, differentiated literacy centers that students work in independently while teachers work with small groups. Prior to this, instruction was focused on whole group lessons, leading immediately into independent or partner practice, bypassing the “guided” instruction portion of the balance literacy model . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 624,195 127,318 15,310 0 4,229,366 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 2018-19 CEP 53  used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 54  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 130 the Parkside School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 130 the Parkside School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 55  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 2018-19 CEP 56  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 130 the Parkside School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 57  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 59  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 60  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 61  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III program at P.S. 130 provides supplemental instruction to English Language Learners (ELLs) in a morning and after school program. The morning program will service approximately 47 ELLs, in two cycles. The first cycle will consist of the fourth grade group of students and will be comprised of 25 ELLs. The second cycle will consist of the fifth grade group of students and will be comprised of 22 ELLs. One ENL and one common branch teacher will provide integrated instruction using the team-teaching model to first and second grade ELLs. The after school program will service approximately 21 ELLS, in two different cycles. The first cycle will consist of the second grade group of students and will be comprised of 10 ELLs. The second cycle will consist of the first grade group of students and will be comprised of 11 ELLs. A common branch teacher and an ENL certified teacher will provide integrated instruction using the team-teaching model to the first and second grade ELLs. Student groups for the morning and afternoon programs have been differentiated by ENL proficiency levels and ELA reading and writing levels. The morning Title III program will begin on or around October 15th and will run until on or around February 26th. It will meet on Monday and Tuesday mornings from 7:30-8:20. The fourth grade cycle will begin on October 15th and end on December 17th. The fifth grade cycle will begin on January 7th and end on February 26th. The afternoon Title III program will begin on October 17th and will run until March 7th. It will meet on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:40-4:10. The second grade cycle will begin on October 17th and end on December 2oth. The first grade cycle will begin on January 9th and end on March 7th. The focus of the instruction is literacy with the intent of improving the students’ language skills, specifically in the areas of listening, reading and writing. The teachers use materials from our social studies integrated units of study whose themes (insects, birds, ancient China, Native Americans, immigration) will be used for enrichment purposes during our morning and after school programs. The teachers will be using supplemental books related to the themes and incorporate ENL strategies. Readworks.org will also be used for the morning and afternoon Title III programs, and will not be used during daily instruction. The teachers will also be utilizing the Imagine Learning program which offers differentiated and personalized instruction for ELLs. Students can access the Imagine Learning program at home in English and their home languages. The language of instruction is English. The students will be engaged in interactive writing activities designed to improve language and literacy skills. The focus of the lessons will be on building vocabulary, reading comprehension, and the use of the four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). Students will also work in the Imagine Learning program which is designed specifically for English Language Learners and offers home language support. The ENL teachers will maintain program notification letters (in parents' preferred languages) and student attendance records in the ENL rooms. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: On Monday afternoon, the ENL teachers, as well as other teachers who work with ELLs will receive professional development to enhance their strategies to work with ELLs. This will include one session each month during the months of October, November, December and January. The professional development sessions will focus on teaching strategies that can benefit our English Language Learners. It will also focus on providing teachers who work with ELLs the opportunity to learn about the ELL Title III programs and how it can benefit their students. The topics to be covered are: An Introduction to ELLs, Phonemic Awareness, Guided and Shared Reading Strategies for ELLs, and Implementing Reader's Theater for ELLs. Classroom teachers of ELLs receive ongoing professional development throughout the year. Liz Irwin provides professional development for math, Dana Dillon provides professional development in literacy, and Anna Switzer provides social studies professional development. Imagine Learning offers a variety of professional development opportunities, including workshops on data integration, best practices, research based literacy instruction and standards alignment curriculum. These professional development sessions are offered throughout the year to the classroom and ENL teachers. The Brooklyn North Field Center offers professional development to ENL teachers throughout the year, including planning lessons to engage and support ELLs. The ENL teachers will attend professional development sessions offered by the Office of English Language Learners as they become available. The professional development sessions will be at no cost to the program. The ENL teachers will maintain agendas and attendance records in the ENL rooms. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At P.S. 130, we understand that parent involvement is critical to student success. ELL parents are encouraged to be actively involved in the life of our school. During the school year parents attend workshops on instructional issues and strategies for them to support children's academic success. Beginning in October, P.S. 130 hosts a monthly Family Friday which continues until May. Parents are invited to attend the monthly Family Fridays which last approximately 50 minutes. This engagement activity allows parents to observe and participate in classroom activities, see the curriculum in action, and celebrate accomplishments. Parents are notified via email and printed notices in the language of their choice. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities We also maintain partnerships with the Brooklyn Public Library, Projects Arts and the East 4th Street Community Garden. Throughout the year the ENL teachers provide workshops. Workshops will be conducted by two ENL certified teachers, Katie LaGreca and Patricia Brown. Some of the topics may include: Technology Resources for ELLs - An interactive workshop for parents of students in grades 2-5 to support the use of educational technology in the home. The ENL teachers will be available to demonstrate the use of technology and assist the parents with practicing the skills needed to use the computer programs at home with their children. Imagine Learning Progress Report - For grades 2-5 parents of ELLs who have been using the Imagine Learning computer program to let them know what their students are learning in the program and how they are progressing. The ENL teachers will maintain invitations sent in parents' preferred languages, agendas and attendance records of the ESL professional development in the ENL rooms. Any other attendance records letters and agendas will be maintained in the Parent Coordinators office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name P.S. 130 - The Parkside Borough Brooklyn School Number 130 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Maria Nunziata Coach Meredith Jose ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katie LaGreca, Pat Brown Teacher/Subject Area Katie Covington Teacher/Subject Area Allie Rice Related-Service Provider Elaine Mei Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Stephanie Parsons Coach Cyrena Leung School Counselor Erin Langstaff Parent Helen Lee Parent Coordinator Jackie Hardy Field Support Center Staff Member Anthony Pizzillo Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 777 2018-19 CEP 66 Total number of ELLs 93 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 130 uses Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) to determine student’s independent and instructional reading levels. Teachers observe student reading behaviors one-on-one, engage in comprehension conversations that go beyond retelling, and make informed decisions that connect assessment to instruction. Fundations® is also utilized within the reading curriculum. Fundations is a multi-sensory and systematic phonics, spelling, and handwriting program that benefits all K-3 students. Fundations is designed as a whole-class, general education program used for prevention (Tier 1) purposes. It also can be taught in a small group or 1:1 setting for intervention (Tier 2). Fundations monitors student learning through formative assessment tools built into the program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students reading levels are assessed three times a year. Classroom teachers, particularly new teachers, are given on-going support and professional development related to the administration of F&P and Fundations. 2018-19 CEP 67  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? F&P assessments provide teachers with tools and texts to observe and quantify specific reading behaviors, and then interpret and use that data to plan meaningful instruction. Additionally, formative assessment and progress monitoring is built into the Fundations which P.S. 130 is currently utilizing for grades K-2. Unit Check-Up quizzes, unit tests and summative assessments that take place at the end of each Fundations unit measure a student's knowledge of concepts and is used to drive instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers review the summative data to determine instructional decisions such as whether to advance to the next unit. The summative data helps determine whether particular students need additional support or if the entire class could benefit from re-teaching the material. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] According to P.S. 130's RTI plan, Tier II intervention is provided to all students in the building who need further academic support. Beyond screening and identification for ENL services to support language development, ELLs are assessed to determine if his/her literacy skills and competencies are meeting grade level benchmarks. If an ELL student is flagged as at risk or below-benchmark on any particular skill or competency, the student receives targeted instructional support to bolster development in this area. Support is delivered in coordination with language support services. This includes AIS, one-to-one coaching and SETTS where applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL data is used to identify ELLs and ensure mandated instructional time, as per CR-Part 154, is provided in a student's schedule. Data from the NYSESLAT also informs program grouping decisions. In addition, ELLs that receive a 3 on the ELA and an Expanding on the NYSESLAT are considered English proficient and are provided with the same services as those who are considered Commanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the school year ENL teachers meet individually with classroom teachers to discuss NYSESLAT data from the previous spring. Based on the findings classroom teachers may decide to adjust differentiation accordingly. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 130 implements a Freestanding ENL program to 106 students. This includes a combined stand-alone and integrated program for ELLs, K-5 depending on their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL level. Stand-alone groups are determined by the ELL students' levels according to Part 154 regulations. ELLs are grouped heterogeneously in classrooms throughout the building. The number of ELLs has decreased in the past year. P.S. 130 is registering more bilingual students who routinely pass the NYSITELL and do not require ENL instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 68  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 130 uses stand-alone and integrated ENL models based on the needs of the ELL population. Great care is vested in the articulation of ELL student groups by grade level and mandated number of hours. Entering and Emerging ELLs are entitled to 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week and are provided with stand-alone ENL services. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are entitled to 180 minutes per week and Commanding ELLs are entitled to 90 minutes per week, which is administered via small group learning in the classroom (as per Option A/CR-Part 154). Commanding ELLs receive guided reading twice a week. Fountas and Pinnell benchmark reading assessments are administered three times per year in conjunction with monthly conferences with the classroom teachers. Commanding ELLs will continue to have access to ELL morning and after school programs. The ENL teachers use flexible grouping when necessary to ensure all mandated hours and levels of proficiency are matched. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At P.S. 130 all units of study in ELA, social studies and math are Common Core Learning Standards aligned and conducted in English. The goal of our ENL program is to foster full English proficiency in a supportive classroom environment. P.S. 130 uses the Responsive Classroom model which incorporates a series of social-emotional and academic guiding principles. This model is based on the belief that integrating academic and social-emotional skills creates an environment that fosters academic development. Teachers tier ELA, math and social studies lessons to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers use a standards based program employing eclectic approaches, ranging from Total Physical Response, Oral/Aural Language Experience and skills and acquisition approaches. ENL lessons are based on students' integrated units of study. Lessons are learner-centered, drawing on students' background knowledge and interests. ELLs are provided authentic reading and writing experiences. Lessons also aim to engage students in meaningful social interaction by working collaboratively in small groups. Oral and written language is acquired simultaneously as students read, write, speak and listen during their learning experiences. ENL classrooms have books of all genres so that students can experience a variety of texts. The use of songs, chants, rhymes, along with puppets, audiovisual and Smartboard are in place to enhance instruction and promote oral/aural practice. In order to establish standardized learning for ELLs, congruency and articulation between our ENL teachers and all pedagogues is ongoing. Through these consultations, multi-sensory learning for ELLs is addressed on an individual basis. ELLs who are eligible for standardized city and state testing receive additional test preparation using ENL strategies and techniques which scaffolds and bridges instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P.S. 130 does not have a TBE or Dual language program, as such teachers do not formally assess students’ home languages. The only home language assessment that is administered at P.S. 130 is the Spanish LAB. The Spanish LAB is a required assessment administered to all ELL students who, during the in-take process, has a home language code of Spanish (SP). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 69  a. SIFE P.S. 130 currently has no SIFE students. Should a SIFE student register the SIFE screening, identification and placement procedures are followed. After a SIFE student is identified as an ELL they are placed in the appropriate ENL program. SIFE students are provided grade appropriate instructional support materials and differentiation of instruction in all areas. b. Newcomer When a newcomer arrives at P.S. 130 resources are used to differentiate instruction and facilitate language development. Particular attention is paid to the educational background of the newcomer (e.g. fine motor skills, ability to read in the home language and make use of bilingual dictionaries). After that is determined various activities and/graphic organizers can help a newcomer acclimate to their environment (e.g. A-Z charts, labelling activities, picture sequencing, jumbling letters/words to make words/sentences). Scaffolding for a newcomer includes explicit instruction in phonological awareness and phonics in order to build decoding skills. In addition, newcomers are given significant opportunities to engage in structured academic talk as well as purposeful independent reading. Reading fluency focuses on developing vocabulary and increased exposure to print. c. Developing As ENL students develop fluency it is essential to prepare them for challenging content. Some strategies include front loading vocabulary, visuals, activating and building background knowledge and distilling content to focus on a few essential concepts. ENL and classroom teachers provide extended and supported opportunities to produce language in the context of content learning. d. Long Term Long-term ELLs are students who, after six years of ELL services, continue to require them. P.S. 130 is an elementary school, it would be unusual to have a long-term ELL in our student population (K-5). e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers continue to differentiate instruction for former ELLs. Small groups are utilized and individualized instruction is provided for former ELLs, to meet their academic needs. Commanding ELLs are entitled to 90 minutes per week, which is administered via small group learning in the classroom(as per Option A/CR-Part 154). Commanding ELLs will receive guided reading twice a week. Fountas and Pinnell benchmark reading assessments are administered three times per year in conjunction with monthly conferences with the classroom teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In conjunction with the SETTS providers and special education classroom teachers, the ENL teachers employ a variety of strategies geared toward ELL-SWDs. ENL teachers are included in PPT and IEP meetings to ensure the students are receiving their IEP mandated ENL instruction. Native Language materials are provided when needed as well as support with technology. The ENL teachers have bilingual dictionaries and books available for students and staff to access. ELLs are encouraged to engage in the same rigorous instruction as their non-ELL peers. Throughout the year ELLs, including those who are SWD, are encouraged to attend Title III programs. These programs provide additional academic content which helps to accelerate language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 130 has two ICT classes on all grades (K-5). Students are placed in ICT classrooms based on their IEP and recommendations by the SBST. Classes are arranged so that ELL-SWDs are in the least restrictive environment. General Ed, ICT and ENL classrooms offer varying options for how information is presented. Every teacher provides opportunities for ELL-SWDs to respond and demonstrate knowledge, skills and abilities. Every effort is made to engage students in learning using a variety of instructional strategies. Teachers routinely adjust lessons in order to ensure the content is accessible to all. Modes of communication are tailored to meet the needs and abilities of ELL-SWDs (e.g., oral, gestures, auditory, written, and visual aids). Teachers use communication modes most accessible to students, at times repeating or rephrasing. ENL teachers coordinate schedules with SETTS providers to make certain ELL-SWDs receive all mandated services. 2018-19 CEP 70  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 130 has several targeted intervention programs that are offered during the school year as well as the summer. All ENL students, including former ELLs, are eligible to participate in after school and morning intervention programs which address student needs in ELA, math, and social studies. Bilingual materials are available as needed to facilitate instruction in these programs. ENL students and teachers attend field trips based on curriculum. For the 2015, 2016 and 2017 school years, with support from the Department of English Language Learners, P.S. 130 provided a Common Core aligned science based summer school for ELLs in grades 2-5. The 2018 summer school for ELLs in grades 2-5 will focus on hands-on-STEM activities, an enriching reading and math curriculum, and visits to museums, parks, and other cultural sites. The summer school curriculum is differentiated to meet the academic and cultural needs of ELLs. All targeted intervention programs are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P.S. 130 will continue to offer morning and after school intervention programs. Based on students' performance, the morning program will be updated to give some K-2 ELLs additional Fundations support. For the upcoming school year, in conjunction with M.S. 839 which shares a site with P.S. 130, ENL teachers are collaborating to form a peer tutoring program in which middle school ELLs will work on reading fluency with the Entering and Emerging ELLs from P.S. 130. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, regardless of ELL status, are invited to participate in morning and after school supplemental services offered at P.S. 130. These programs include both enrichment and intervention. P.S. 130 offers music programs through Carnegie Hall, as well as Chess in school, puppetry through the Arts Connection, Girls on the Run, Young Talent Percussion and band. ELLs actively participate in after school groups. Invitations and permission slips are sent home, informing parents of all available programs in their preferred language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Every classroom at P.S. 130 includes a library of diverse books for students at every level. Each students has personal access to Reading A-Z at school and home. Additionally, some teachers subscribe to Time for Kids as a supplemental instructional material. ELLs also have access to the Imagine Learning program. Teachers enhance lessons through the use of Smartboards and computer carts in the classroom. Moreover, Technology is included in P.S. 130's curriculum and all students attend a technology class once a week. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P.S. 130 encourages families to maintain the use of the home language. Studies have shown that students with prior knowledge in their home language more rapidly acquire second language skills. Bilingual dictionaries are available to support students in the classroom where necessary. All communication with parents is translated, but in the ENL program model all instruction is delivered in English and the home language is not formally assessed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P.S. 130 realizes the importance of making sure that students are able to interact and share educational experiences with peers, as such students are placed in age appropriate classes. The classroom and ENL teachers scaffold instruction to best meet the needs of all students. Regarding ELL-SWD, students are placed in programs that best meet their academic needs, based on their IEP. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 71  P.S. 130 shares a building with M.S. 839. The ENL teachers are collaborating to form a peer tutoring program in which middle school ELLs will work with the Entering and Emerging P.S. 130 ELLs. The M.S. 839 ENL teacher and the P.S. 130 ENL teachers assisted each other in scoring the speaking and writing sections of the NYSESLAT. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teachers reach out to the parents of newly enrolled ELLs at the beginning of the school year. Parents are invited to the ELL Parent/Teacher Orientation and receive written notification informing them of their child's ELL status. P.S. 130 understands that parental support is of the utmost importance and Jackie Hardy, the parent coordinator, PTA and all staff try to establish relationships that encourage parent involvement which assists newly enrolled ELLs. P.S. 130 hosts 'Super Saturday' multi-cultural events throughout the year for parents and children. Translation is offered during parent and PTA meetings. In addition, P.S. 130 recently offered a five week adult ENL class to parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 130 does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers regularly attend professional development workshops provided by the district as well as the Department of English Language Learners. Professional development topics include: developing academic language in Math, supporting academic discussions for ELLs, vocabulary development and elementary ELL literacy instruction, to name a few. A classroom and/or out of classroom teacher regularly accompanies the ENL teachers to professional development opportunities provided by the Brooklyn North Field Support Center. ENL teachers provided a four-part professional development workshop on the topic of scaffolding for ELLs. Instructional strategies were shared and discussed and resources that teachers can use with the ELLs in their classrooms were made accessible. In the future this workshop will be provided to all new teachers. In addition, ENL teachers provide professional development for the paraprofessionals at P.S. 130. Paras are made aware of additional resources available and how to access them for ELLs in their classrooms. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The majority the teachers at P.S. 130 have the mandated 7.5 hours of ELL training. In addition, P.S. 130 offers a variety of on-site professional development workshops utilizing outside contractors in the areas of ELA, math, and social studies. New teachers are encouraged to participate in UFT courses, “P” credit classes offered by the DOE as well as conferences offered by 2018-19 CEP 72  the DOE. P.S. 130 sends teachers to applicable DELL training and professional development. Sign-in sheets and other records are maintained in the ENL room and the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At P.S. 130 Tuesday afternoons from 2:40-3:55 PM are devoted to parent engagement. Parents of ELLs have the opportunity to contact both classroom and ENL teachers during this time. In addition, parents of ELLs with disabilities meet with the school based support team annually to review student progress and make any necessary changes to their IEP. ENL teachers participate in these meetings and provide information related to the student's language proficiency and development. Translation services are provided to parents as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are invited to workshops given by the ENL teachers to support their child's learning. ENL teachers have provided workshops for parents of ELLs on topics including: ELL parents are also offered workshops by the PTA throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator works closely with the school community to ensure that parents of ELLs are informed of all school events and that translation services are available to parents as needed. The Parent Coordinator at P.S. 130, Jackie Hardy, is a bilingual Spanish speaker. She engages with and involves parents in the school community by working with the principal, school staff, school leadership team, PTA and community groups. She convenes regular parent meetings and events around topics of key concerns to parents. Jackie maintains ongoing contact with community organizations that are involved with providing services to the school’s educational program. Jackie organizes back to school and other events to increase parental and community involvement and creates a welcoming school environment to parents. In addition to the outreach provided by the Parent Coordinator there are numerous committees available for ELL parents to join through the PTA including: Community Affairs, Health and Nutrition, Art, Music, After School and the Multi-Cultural Committee. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ENL teachers have had several projects funded through Donors Choose. Notably, fifth grade ENL students had the opportunity to see Charlie and the Chocolate Factory on Broadway, as a culminating event of their work in the ENL after school program. Efforts will continue to offer exciting and relevant learning experiences for the ENL students at P.S. 130. ELLs in grades K-4 participated in the Title III ESL morning program. Teachers and students worked well together to build language skills through the school’s curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Nunziata, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 130 - The Parkside School DBN: 15K130 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maria Nunziata Title Principal Stephanie Parsons Assistant Principal Jackie Hardy Parent Coordinator Katie LaGreca ENL/Bilingual Teacher Meredith Jose Parent Katie Covington Teacher/Subject Area Allie Rice N/A Cyrena Leung Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Erin Langstaff School Counselor Anita Skop Anthony Pizzillo N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Anthony Pizzillo Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 06/19/2018 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K130 School Name: The Parkside School Superintendent: Anita Skop The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jackie Hardy Parent Coordinator YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 76  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 77  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 78 
