2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 23K150 School Name: P.S. 150 CHRISTOPHER Principal: TRACEY QUARLES 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS 150 332300010150 BEDS Code: Grades Served: K-5 School Address: 364 Sackman Street School Number (DBN): 23K150 Phone Number: (718)495-7746 Fax: (718)922-3785 Dr. Tracey Quarles tquarle@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dr. Tracey Quarles Elizabeth Green TenaPerez Felicia Munroe LetishaSpencer N/A N/A Hannah Omolade Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MiatheresaPate Superintendent: 1784 Park Place, Brooklyn. NY 11233 mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)346-0816 Phone Number: (718)346-0816 Fax: FSC: North Brooklyn Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 131 Livingston Street 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Email Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 935-3954 Fax: 718 935-2382 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Tracey Quarles Elizabeth Green TenaPerez RockelHolmes LetishaSpencer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Hannah Olomade CBO Representative, if applicable Tiffany Tavella Felicia Munroe Cathy Ann Khan Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anthony Crocker Ethel McDonald Andrea Mendez Yogi Lazu Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: SCEP Overview At the Christopher School, it is our mission to foster a nurturing and safe environment where scholars can reach their full potential with confidence. Scholars will engage in a diverse culture where education is respected and mistakes are accepted as a part of learning. Through academic rigor, data analysis and flexible planning, scholars will become active, well-adjusted leaders in their community and strive to be life-long learners. The Christopher School will persistently inspire and strive for excellence. Our Goal: Our goal is to continuously nurture our scholars to be life-long learners, where education and character is the goal to true education. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Collaborations  For the 2017-2018 school year PS 150, via the COMPASS grant, will partner with St. Nicks Alliance After School Program. This program will provide after school academic and recreational support to scholars enrolled in the program. The program will also provide families with access to additional social services such as housing, adult education services.  PS 150 has received a Violence Prevention After School Grant and has partnered with Playworks, Community Counseling and Mediation, Green Generations, the Leadership Program. o Playworks trains scholars in social emotional learning, safe play, inclusion and leadership. They offer organized recess activities for all scholars. Playworks provides select grades 4 and 5 scholars leadership training to encourage them to lead positive play amongst scholars in grades K-2. The leaders are called Junior Coaches and serve their peers during lunch. These scholars receive special training and attend conferences organized by Playworks. One week a month Playworks sends in a trainer who coaches the school staff on how to engage scholars in positive play. o Green Generations works with select scholars who teachers believe would benefit from additional social emotional support. These scholars learn coping skills and are taught how to resolve conflict. o Child Mind Institute supports the social emotional needs of scholars through small group counseling and offers character Education development o The Leadership Program, Martial Arts from Community Counseling and Mediation.  PS 150 will continue to partner with Smile Dentist who provides dental services during the school day. Special Community Collaborations:  PS 150 has developed partnerships with several agencies and organizations. Via our Violence Prevention Grant we have partnered with Community Counseling and Mediation, Green Generations, Playworks and The Leadership Program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  o Community Counselling and Mediation offers martial arts to 40 at-risk scholars as part of their Physical Education classes. o Green Generation offers Social Emotional Learning activities and nutritional education to 40 at-risk scholars. o The Leadership Program provides leadership training to select classes in grades 3-5. The Leadership Program teaches children and adults how to view and express themselves and how to interact with one another and the outside world in a positive, pro-active way. Through this process The Leadership Program is designed to help shape environments that cultivate personal and social development. o Department of Health/Mental Health Consultants helps parents and school community with resources to recognize and support scholars with special needs. o Playworks services all scholars in grade K-5 via in class workshops and recess activities. Playworks' aim is to create a place for every kid on the playground to feel included, be active, and build valuable social and emotional skills. Playworks coaches offer an essential opportunity for children to explore their imaginations, to connect with other kids, and to stretch and grow physically, emotionally and socially.  PS 150 also partners with New York Psychotherapy Counseling Center and ICL. The centers provides outside  counseling and psychological services to scholars and their families. They also provide professional development to staff and workshops to families. For After School Extended Learning Time programming, PS 150 partners with the St. Nicks Alliance. St. Nicks offers literacy enrichment with special attention given to the arts. They offer homework help via their group leaders and students will be involved in various performances showcasing their after-school work throughout the school year.  There is an after-school program for ENL students to provided additional support in developing the English language  After school program for enrichment to support our scholars on Level 3 and 4 and RTI program to support our scholars that need additional support. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations. PS 150 has 20 scholars who receive ENL services. The home languages of these scholars include: Arabic speakers, Chinese speakers and Spanish speakers. The ENL teacher will receive training via professional development with the Field Support Center. The school needs translation services for our Chinese and Arabic speakers since no one on staff speaks these languages. Approximately, one third (78) of our student population have IEPs. We have self contained 12:1:1 classrooms on every grade, and ICT settings on every grade with the exception of grades 2 and 4. We need in house consistent supports and strategies to help manage the social-emotional needs of our special needs population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools  Areas of Progress- N/A  Areas of Focus: This year the area of focus was to increase the reading level of scholars. To do that, Guided reading professional development was given to teachers to support the practice in the classroom. o Supportive Environment (Safety, Classroom Behavior, and Academic Press). This school year (2017-2018) community circle is embedded in the school day to support classroom management. Morning meeting is done during morning intake. Scholars say the pledge of Allegiance and the Panther's Pride Chant. The role out of PBIS as incentive for scholars behaviors. o Effective Leadership (Teacher Influence). Teacher facilitated team meetings with actionable next steps that would impact student achievement. ie: Using ATLAS protocols, data meetings, student work analysis. Discussions around curriculum planning and developing pacing calendars to support the following years work. There are clear expectations about how students learn. The development of 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  the school's mission statement and how we believe students should learn supported a clear expectation. o Trust (Teacher-Principal Trust. This school year (2017-2018), there has been a culture shift in the school community. The open door policy has created an environment where communication is encouraged. Administrative team is approachable in any situation. o Pedagogy and Instruction (QR 1.2) -In order to help improve in the area of Pedagogy and Instruction, the school has partnered with Uncommon schools to strengthen pedagogy. Using their guided reading strategies to meet scholars individual needs. The purchase of The Next Step Forward in Guided Reading supported teachers in developing effective guided reading practices. The partnership with BLES (Brooklyn Landmark Elementary School) to become engaged in what effective practice in guided reading. The school community is using the Common Core Companion to being to unpack the New York State Learning Standards. The Common core Companion book supported the development of lesson planning and implementation of the standards. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K150 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 171 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 95.9% % Reduced Lunch 8.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.8% 30.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.09 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 9.3% 59% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 18 19 90.1% 2.3% 34.5% 64.9% 0.6% 2.3% 2 21% 6.3 10.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength  o The school leader has sent teachers on showcase school visits and visits at BLES to support the guided reading intiative. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subject areas in order to create interdisciplinary curricula and enrichment opportunities. o School and teacher leaders ensures that instructional practices and strategies are implemented through daily lesson plans that address the goals and needs of all students. o Teachers collaboratively work together to unpack the CCLS. This work support pedagogy.  Needs o The school needs to build upon the CCLS using resources like; (Engage NY-Expeditionary Learning, MyOn, Mathletics and Ready) and make revisions to support the teaching and learning in the school building. o Teachers need to develop and ensure that lesson plans include UDL (Universal Design for learning) that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and address student achievement needs. o Curriculum maps need to be developed to incorporate UDL and misconceptions around the content taught and the design of lesson plans, pacing calendars and curriculum maps. Rigorous tasks were not evident in all lesson plans. Samples of student work did not help driving instruction until the use of the ATLAS protocol. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  o Consistency of classroom management techniques, implementation of the instructional model, and PBIS o strategies often sparks behavioral issues in the classroom. Incorporation of specific instructional materials for engagement of English Language Learners and students with disabilities in rigorous work was also not consistent. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. With the use of The Common Core Companion: The Standard Decoded, the development of pacing calendars, unit maps and a comprehensive lesson plan structure will be evident through student work samples, Pre and Post assessment. Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) will be embedded in lesson plans and implementation of instruction. This will prepare SWD's with specific skills and give students access and progress through the Common Core Learning Standards. By June 2019, the student proficiency will increase 4% to 8% in ELA as measured by formative assessments and the Developmental Reading Assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) A Universal literacy coach will provide on-going support for teachers in literacy in Grades K-2. Teachers September 2018- January 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers. will  Participate in professional development cycles around creating pacing calendars, unit plans and lesson plans. This will be on going through out the summer and school year. Teachers Summer 2018 Principal The school with partner with the Riverdale community school and PS 298 for professional development in: teachers, teacher leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher leader Riverdale: Lesson Study in Mathematic Discourse. PS 298: TC Writing To help to support pedagogy in mathematics and Writing Teachers will create lab sites to model new effective pratices Admin. Teachers October 2016 0 June 2019. Prinicpal, Assistant principal teacher leaders and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host two Curriculum Nights during the 2017-2018 school year. One will be held in the Fall, another in the Spring. The PA will also host parent workshops addressing the Common Core Standards in the Fall. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers salaries and per session funds professional developers (Math Discourse and TC) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 the average student proficiency will increase by 10% in ELA as measured by periodic assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year Periodic Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  Social Emotional Programs and Support o Strengths  During the 2016-2017 school year 1 social worker, 1 paraprofessional, and 1 teacher were certified in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS).  As a result of the training, the school now has 6 staff members certified in LSCI and 9 staff members certified in TCIS.  Playworks, L&G, Community Counseling and Mediation, Green Generation, and TLP partner with the school and support students' emotional needs and development o Needs  We need to strengthen classroom management practices, as well as provide additional support for teachers in this area, to create more positive classroom cultures which would then decrease the number of classroom incidents. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school community’s overall score for Supportive Environment will increase from 1.0 to 2.5 by providing staff with additional professional development throughout the district to support development of pedagogical skills as measured by the Framework for Great Schools data report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Send 3 additional staff members to TCIS or LSCI training. Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Paraprofessionals Teachers September 2017 - June 2018 Administrators, Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Implementation of Peer Mentoring program and continuation of Playworks Scholars September 2017 -June 2018 SEL Director, PTA and Playworks coaches Bi-weekly Social-Emotional and Behavior Management Professional Development for paraprofessionals and staff previously trained in TCIS (refresher). Paraprofessionals September 2017-November 2018, February 2018-April 2018 September 2017- June 2018 SAPIS (TCIS certified staff member) and Administrators SBST members PBIS/Disciplinary Team members Administrators Vendors associated with the grant PPT members: Principal, School Psychologist, Social Worker, SAPIS, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher Administrators School Aides Teaches The SAPIS worker will serve as the Social Emotional Director overseeing programs from our Extended Day Violence Prevention Grant (EDVP). We will partner with Community Counseling and Mediation for martial arts, Green Generations for SEL and nutrition, The Leadership Program for student leadership development and Playworks for safe play and inclusive recreational activities SAPIS PPT will meet bi-monthly to discuss disciplinary concerns and provide immediate action plans for teachers to develop prior to the development of FBA/BIPs. The School Psychologist and Social Worker will provide staff development on Social Emotional Learning. Daily School-wide Town Hall Meeting (pledge of allegiance, school pledge, and school rules review) Teachers Paras Staff Scholars September 2017 to June 2018 September 2017 - June 2018 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Administer a mid-year safety survey to staff, scholars (Grades 3-5) and parents. Staff December 2017 PBIS/Disciplinary Team Scholars (3-5) Parents Scholars Administrators October 2017 - June 2018 Teachers SAPIS PBIS Team School Aides Staff Developer from Playworks Continue implementing Playworks -play and recess social-emotional development program. Monthly school spirit assemblies: PBIS First Fridays Awards Ceremony(most improved student, student of the month, 100% attendance, improved attendance), Adventures Bound Activities (Game Show, Team Building, Friends and Family Day), Megman and Friends Anti-bullying Assembly, Box Out Bullying Assembly, Harlem Magic Masters Assembly, Oratory Contest, Mathletics Contest, Spelling Bee, etc...) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The SAPIS worker, L&G, CITE, Parent Coordinator, and District Family Coordinator will facilitate workshops on how specific strategies like partner reading, that parents can use at home to support their scholars' learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBST Guidance Counselor SAPIS Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) School Psychologist School Social Worker PBIS/Disciplinary Team PBIS incentives Extended Day Violence Prevention Program Funds for assembly programs (Adventures Bound, Out of the Box Bullying, MegaMan and Friends, Harlem Magic Masters) 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, the school will have reduced the number of level 3 -5 incidences by 5% as measured by OORS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Once a month the Safety Team will review the following OORS reports: Location Summary, Recidivist Summary, VADIR preliminary report, Incident and Suspension report, and the level 1-5 report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  o In the Fall of 2016 teachers began implementing a parallel teaching model of instruction which began to foster small group instruction, independent learning opportunities and a shift away from teacher-dominated instruction.. In the Spring of 2017 Teacher teams revised and updated curriculum maps for the upcoming year (ELA) o o Teaching strategies support multiple entry points.  Needs o Teacher teams need to collaborate and analyze student work as a means of refining instructional strategies and rigor for planning student activities. o The pattern of student-to-student interaction and discussion is not consistently evident across classrooms. Instruction is teacher-dominated. o o Curriculum maps need further revisions to include rigorous projects and tasks. Curriculum maps need to be revised to ensure that the standards are the area of focus not the specific curriculum (Ready Gen/Engage NY-Expeditionary Learning) 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the overall MOTP for developing teachers will decrease by 10% increasing effective MOTP to 68% as measured by teacher observations and strengthening teacher teams with the use of the ATLAS protocol to collaboratively reflect on teaching practices and student work. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development on lesson planning, pedagogy and curriculum mapping (ELA) Teachers August 2018- March 2019 -Creating Guided Reading Lesson Plans -Using TC Writing materials to design coherent writing lessons. -Using Standards as bases for modifying and developing lesson plans Professional Development on data analysis: -Analyzing NYS Exam results Teachers and Administrators September 2018- May 2019 -Analyzing TC Assessments as a tool for Guided Reading -Analyzing Periodic Assessments and using the findings to modify instruction. 6 week cycles in inquiry teams to monitor the use of different strategies. Teachers and Administrators September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators Teacher leaders (district) Early Childhood Lit. Coach Staff developer- IO Datacation Administrators Early Childhood Lit. Coach Administrators Classroom Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be a Spring and Fall Curriculum Night aligned to Parent- Teacher conferences, facilitated by teachers, where parents will learn specific strategies they could use at home to support learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Teachers Administrators Literacy Coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of all observations rated in domain 2 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Observation Dashboard Report-Rating Distributed by Domain/Component Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths  The school leader makes instructional and organizational decisions that are aligned to the school's mission and vision to support the school’s instructional framework and school's goals. School leaders is providing professional development and opportunities aligned to teacher needs and development.  The school leader shares the SCEP goals. The school leader collaboratively worked with staff to create a mission statement and a shared belief of how students learn. Mission Statement and shared belief is posted in the lobby of school building, all classrooms and in the corridor of school building. Needs School leader needs to develop a structure to monitor staff around the use of professional development strategies being used in the classroom. School leader needs to develop a clear system of professionals developement targeted to support teacher development. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrators will provide each teacher rated “Developing” in the 2017-2018 MOTP with a summative report outlining their goals, memorializing feedback and their progress on the Danielson competency that represents the highest leverage area of development. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal will meet with each teacher to review their Advance ratings (Danielson competencies) and jointly decide on three areas for development for the year. From the three goals, the principal and teacher will select one competency as the highest leverage area of development. Administrators will create a calendar/schedule for observations and feedback sessions Administrators will conduct monthly meetings for teachers to discuss their overall development. School leader will introduce the ATLAS protocol to help teachers analyze student's work samples to guide instructional decisions Teachers Principal September -October 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers July and August 2018 Principal September 2017- March 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal Administration October Principal and Assistant principal Principal and Assistant Principal 2017-June 2018 September 2017-June 2018 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators will meet with teachers (teachers team) weekly around classroom data. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration, along with the parent coordinator will work with the parent in the school community to support their scholars at home. Parents will be trained to assist in the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. District Family Coordinator Parent Coordinator PA President 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our goal is to increase parental engagement by 10% by June 2018 through developing selective and intensive activities within the school community as measured by artifacts and attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly attendance sheets and increased parental engagement.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength  Workshops are held monthly to engage parents in learning opportunities to support their children on the various literacy and math programs used by scholars.  Open house held annually to introduce the parents to the teachers a school policy and learning expectations.  Parent /Teacher conferences are held three times a year to inform parents of student progress and expectations. During these conferences student progress is presented to parents using data from formative assessments as well as summative assessment. Needs  There needs to be a mind set shift in how the community view education.  Mind shift training of staff and parent around education (professional development)  Engaging activities for the whole family Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the parent involvement team and parent coordinator will design parent workshops and a Saturday parent academy to increase parent engagement by 20% to support the needs of parents with in the school community as measured by parental attendance (Attendance sheet). 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The Parent Coordinator will meet with and develop relationships with neighborhood CBOs that provide support to parents and invite them to present at a monthly workshop. Local and city CBOs The SLT will complete (and revise if necessary) the application to be a Community Schools SLT The Parent Coordinator will create monthly calendar outlining events and workshops. Parents, staff and scholars Parent Coordinator Family worker SLT members/Principal Parent Coordinator August 2018-September 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 The SLT will discuss the needs of the school community SLT members October Principal, SLT The principal will conduct a monthly Parent-Principal meetings to discuss school’s progress towards goals, parents concerns and action steps parents can take to help their scholar and the meet their goals. Parents and Guardians Prinicpal will create a monthly news letter for parents to update them on upcoming instructional units parents 2018- June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator Principal The school will renew School Messenger in order to maintain communication with parents about events at the school via phone calls. Parents and Guardians August 2018 Principal The school will renew MyOn and Mathletics so parents can work with their scholars at home to support academic growth. Parents and Guardians September 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. L&G St. Nick's Alliance 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Cook Shop Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Messenger - online automated call system Datacation- online grade keeping and parent outreach program Monthly Parent-Principal meeting Monthly Parent Coordinator workshops SLT meetings/members Monthly PTA meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2018, the school will worked collaboratively with CBOs to utilize their parental involvement components Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Montly attendance sheets of parents participants. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By May 2019, scholars who have been consistently enrolled and attended the academic component of the ELT program will show a 7% gain on the end of year ELT assessment. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The school will provide ELT services during and in conjunction with our already existing after school Compass program, St. Nick's Alliance. The school will partner with St. Nick's in recruiting the 100 students with special supports for students with disabilities, required for the Compass Grant. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. PS 150 will offer academic support for AIS-eligible students. We will work in partnership with Nt. Nick's Alliance after school program. Two days a week PS 150 teachers will offer academic enrichment programs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Scholars in grades 3-5 will receive academic instruction using the MyOn and Mathletics programs in the classroom. this will satisfy the tier 1 interventions. Each scholar will work directly with the teacher in small groups as well as independent work. The SAPIS will be on-hand to offer social-emotion support and peer mentoring sessions. In September PS 150 and St. Nick's Alliance will conduct a recruitment campaign to encourage families to enroll in the after school program. Parents will be notified via School Messenger, flyers, Teacher-Parent Outreach calls, and via the September Parent-Teacher Conference. Enrichment arts program will be provided by PS 150 staff, and Brooklyn Arts Council. Enrichment programs will include but are not limited to visual arts, dance, and martial arts. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement.  A number of classroom teachers will work with St. Nicks to provide academic intervention and enrichment activities. Scholars attending the program will take an initial assessment, mid-year assessment and an exit assessment.  Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The academic portion of the program supported by select classroom teachers will be implemented from November 2018 to March 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. St. Nick's COMPASS Grant (partnership) Teacher’s per session Supervisor per session Funds for Ready Math and Ready Reading Materials Mathletics program MyOn program Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, scholars enrolled in the PS 150 teacher supported academic ELT program will demonstrate a 5% growth on interim ELT assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will utilize teacher-created assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) MyOn, Ready Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.)  Scholars not making progress on TC assessments Scholars scoring 1.8- 2.4 on NYS Exam When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school Day, After school by hired teachers During the school Day During the day by classroom teacher During the school Day Small group pull out and push in by SETSS teacher (as per space availability) Small group support by classroom teacher (intensive guided reading) Small group pull out and push in by SETSS teacher Small group Instruction Small group pull out and push in bySETSSteacher Small group support by classroom teacher (guided reading) Small group and one on one support During the school day At Lunch time Mathematics Scholars scoring 1.8- 2.4 on NYS Exam Mathletics Science Report Card grades from Marking Period 1 Grade 4 Test Prep Social Studies  MyOn, Ready Scholars not making progress on TC assessments Scholars scoring 1.8- 2.4 onNYSExam At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  OORS incidents Connect with Kids Students with FBA/BIPs 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) At the end of June 2018 PS 150 had 24 scholars in temporary housing. Awaiting foster care placement 1 Doubled up 14 Shelter 6 Other temporary living situation 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Each scholar will receive 5 short sleeve uniform shirt, 2 pants, sweat pant. Scholars will receive all school supplies (book bag, notebooks, pencils, etc…) Scholars will receive a book bag with summer reading materials and math material Scholars will receive a hat, umbrella and gloves for inclement weather. At-risk scholars who are STH will be selected to participate in one of our Extended Day Violence Prevention Programs (CCM-martial arts, Green Generations, Playworks, The Leadership Program) The school will work closely with families with STH to connect them with resources offered by St. Nick's Alliance to address concerns (housing, adult education, jobs, etc...) The Office Family Worker and Attendance Teacher will work closely with parent of STH via home visits and personalized daily phone calls when scholars are absent. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Each Monday classroom teachers, paraprofessionals and staff will attend Professional Development for 80 minutes. These training sessions which are conducted by the principal and staff developers/consultants. During PD sessions and during grade team meetings, teacher teams analyze students work products and discuss lessons that need to be taught to improve the product. Teachers who exhibit difficulties are provided with job-embedded one-on-one staff development. PD for literacy will be provided by Administration. To analyzed data, teachers and paraprofessionals will use the ATLA protocol to surface common trends and themes. PD will be provided to teachers given instruction to our students with special needs, ELL, and AIS, in the district and out the district. Ongoing PD (in house and outside) for Guided reading, will be provided. And understanding the new Teacher Effectiveness and Development System will be provided by the Administrative Team, the MOSL team and Support Staff The principal and the assistant principal will attend PD offered by the district. They will turnkey the information to the staff. PD for Establishing Positive Classroom Management and School Culture will be provided by the SBST, Use PBIS to support the positive reinforcement through out the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Our teachers will attend weekly Professional Learning Community meetings on Mondays with a focus on improving the Quality and Quantity of student work. These PD sessions will be facilitated by staff members including Emergent Leaders (D23). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our school works closely with our neighborhood daycare centers to provide inter-visitations for incoming pre-school students. Students from the Nat Azarow Day Care will hold their step up services at PS 150. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school has a MOSL Team and Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) where the teachers review prerequisites for the implementation of and effectiveness of assessments. These teams evaluate student assessment results and work data to revise and modify lesson plans along with the reading program to address the needs of all students as diverse learners. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $163,669 $16,979 $42,682 $54,259 N/A N/A $1,586,184 X X X x N/A N/A x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X X X X N/A N/A x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-P 46   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy 2017-2018 I. General Expectations PS150 the Christopher School agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: ○ The school will put into effect a parent engagement committee to help initiate programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated by the all stakeholders ○ The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA. ○ The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  ○ The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: ○ Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring— ■ that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s education; ■ that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; ■ that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child ■ The school will inform parents and parental organizations through monthly meetings, and the creation of a Parent Information Center for the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the School building. II. Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components 1. PS 150 The Christopher School will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: discuss at School leadership team meetings, PA Executive Board Meetings, PA Meetings. 2. PS 150 The Christopher School will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school improvement plan under section 1116 of the ESSA: scheduled State review (ITT), have SCEP training and planning sessions. 3. PS 150 The Christopher School will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: discussions at school leadership meetings, workshops on the interpretation and utilization of data, workshops on study skills and standardized testing. 4. PS 150 The Christopher School will coordinate and integrate Title I with parental involvement strategies under the following programs: Monthly Parent-Principal Breakfasts, Saturday enrichment Program, After-school programs, tutorials, Title II, Reading/Math push in program, RtI services, understanding the CCLS in literacy and mathematics.. 6. PS 150 The Christopher School will build the schools’ and parent’s capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement. a. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following: i. the State’s content standards (Common core Learning Standards - CCLS) iii. the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: standardized test workshops, and parent teacher conferences 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  b. The school will provide materials and workshops to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster academic parental involvement. c. P.S. 150 will educate school staff concerning the value and utility of contributions of parents as well as implement and utilize programs such as: DataCation and School Messenger to enable teachers and staff to reach out to, communicate and work with parents as equal partners. d. The school will provide opportunities for learning how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, by offering workshops to parents by the parent coordinator and various staff members (SBST, administrators and teachers). e. The school will utilize the Translation Committee and the Parent Coordinator to ensure that information related to the school and parent- programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand. III. Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components The school, in consultation with its parents, will build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to better support their children’s academic achievement, by integrating the following discretionary activities listed under section 1118(e) of the ESSA by: ○ providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training; ○ paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions; ○ training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents; ○ in order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arranging school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences with all stake holders who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; ○ adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement; ○ developing appropriate roles in parental involvement activities for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations; ○ providing other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request. IV. Adoption 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  This School Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by School Leadership Team Meetings. This policy was revised and adopted by the PS 150 The Christopher School on and will be in effect for the period 2017-2018 school year. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, Part A children on or before October 31, 2017. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. Parental Involvement and School Quality PS 150 The Christopher School will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. Evaluations will be conducted through surveys that will be distributed to all parents through mailings and student handouts. Parent Coordinator along with the PA will be responsible for creating, distributing and collecting the surveys. Parental roles will be determined by the results of the survey. The survey will be collected by the homeroom teachers and submitted to the leadership team. The leadership team members will compile the results into a table. Results will be discussed, a list of conclusions will be drawn and an action plan devised. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with the Saturday Academy Program, After-school programs, tutorials, Title II D, Reading/Math pull-out/push-in program, RTI, Test preparation workshops in literacy and math, and conduct other activities, such as parent workshops that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children. This is done by communicating with the home through the school messenger, notices, phone calls and direct mailing. 1. School-Parent Compact – School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 150 The Christopher School and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This school-parent compact is in effect during school year 2017-2018. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT The Christopher School and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this Compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share that responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This School-Parent Compact is in effect during school year 2017-2018. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The Christopher School (PS 150) will:  Provide high-quality instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables our scholars to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows:  In order to provide a high quality instructional program, all educators need to make the commitment of becoming life long learners. Our teachers will acquire skills to unpack the Common Core Learning Standards. Our teachers will meet weekly in grade team meetings with coaches and the administration to develop teaching skills and stay current on new standards.  Teachers on each grade level/subject area will developed a instructional map using Common Core State Learning Standards (CCLS) as a guide.  Teachers will create rigorous end of unit tasks and project based learning activities that all students must complete to demonstrate independent mastery of the skills.  Teachers will use formal and informal assessments as a guide to plan and modify instruction according to their students’ needs. Our students will be instructed within their “zone of proximal development.”  Teachers on each grade level/subject area will develop lesson plans to meet the needs of diverse learners by including differentiated activities/tasks appropriate for students’ varied levels of learning and incorporate Universal Design of Learning for student development.  Teachers will include student-centered instruction that is aligned with instructional maps, using Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) as a guide.  Teachers on each grade level will include the use of ‘authentic texts’ in ELA lesson plans to enhance and support students’ learning.  The students will be given many resources to assist them in their educational journey; appropriate text books, classroom leveled libraries, access to laptop computers and computer based software, etc. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships PS 150 will hold parent workshops teaching parents specific strategies they can use at home to help their scholars with learning.  Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff as follows:  Tuesdays during Parent Outreach sessions (immediately after school)  Parents can request to see a teacher or an administrator either in writing or verbally by notifying the Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator will notify the staff member and set a convenient time for the meeting. Under no circumstances can parents interrupt instruction to meet with the teacher. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  PART I – REQUIRED SCHOOL-PARENT COMPACT PROVISIONS  Conduct parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: September 13, 2017 November 15, 2017 March 14, 2018 May 23, 2018  Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide progress reports as follows: Progress Reports are available electronically via email, but will be sent home with scholars quarterly. The school will send a hard copy of the Datacation/Pupil Path progress report on the following dates: 1. October 7, 2017 2. December 8, 2017 3. February 2, 2018 4. April 7, 2018 5. May 19, 2018  Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide report cards as follows: 1. November 14, 2017 2. January 11, 2018 3. March 9, 2018 4. June 28, 2018 II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  Supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by:  Ensuring that my child and I use the online programs provided by the school (MyOn, GoMath Academy, I-Ready, Think Central, Mathletics) talking with my child about his/her school activities everyday; scheduling daily homework time;  making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school;  monitoring attendance;    providing an environment conducive for study;  making sure that homework is completed;  monitoring the amount of television my children watch  Make sure that my child gets the proper rest by getting to bed at a reasonable time.  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education;  Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time;  Ensuring that my child wears his/her uniform;  Participating in school activities on a regular basis;  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate;  Reading together with my child every day;  Providing my child with a library card;  Communicating positive values and character traits, such as Play Fairly, Act Responsibly, Work Together, Show Respect; o Supporting the school’s goals of Be Responsible, Be Respectful, Be Rewarded  Respecting the cultural differences of others;  Helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior;  Being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district;   Expressing high expectations and offering praise and encouragement or achievement  Speak with the parent coordinator daily about any concerns. Supporting the school discipline policy; -Be respectful and responsible. III. Student Responsibilities -Respectful to their peers, themselves, and staff. -Come to school prepared with homework. -Wear school uniform. -Follow adults' directions. Panther's Pride Chant As a scholar of PS 150 Today and everyday I promise to be 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Respectful to my peers, to the staff and to myself I promies to be responsible. I will be prepared and hold myself accountable You will see that I am caring and Kind And I represent PS 150 with Pride I will be respectful. I will be responsible. And I will be rewarded 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name PS 150 Borough Brooklyn School Number 150 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tracey Quarles Coach Nicole Graham ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Patrick Walsh Teacher/Subject Area Valerie Daniels Teacher/Subject Area Tammy Stephens Related-Service Provider Rachel Riley-Banks Superintendent Miatheresa Pate Assistant Principal Nadya LaBorde-Williams Coach Nicole Graham School Counselor Tracy Adams Parent Alhassane Cissie Parent Coordinator Zena Conyers Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 175 2018-19 SCEP-P 56 Total number of ELLs 21 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. At PS 150 we administer the TCRWP Running Record exam and Dolch Word List (graded word list) to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These assessments give us insights about the grade level scholars are reading on and helps us set incremental goals for each scholar. The running records and Dolch Word List helps us track whether the scholar is making progress over time. We also use the NYSITELL as an assessment tool to measure the English language proficiency of our ELLs. This data provides insight to their command of the English language so that we can determine the best way to create a learning environment that will support and advance their language acquisition process. We also administer the NYSESLAT once a year, which provides us with an overview of our ELLs' progress with the English language in the areas of reading, writing, listening and speaking. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Assessment dates are put on the school-wide assessment calendar and all classroom teachers are required to enter the data in an online database (Assessment Pro) by a set due date. Assessments are done 4 times a year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL teacher evaluates the progress of scholars via TC Reading Assessments, on-demand writing samples, periodic essays, quizzes, chapter and unit tests, and conferencing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After summative data is evaluated classroom teachers conduct small group instruction to address strengths and weaknesses highlighted by the assessment. One on one conferencing and after school programs are implemented to service the neediest students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The data gathered from the NYSITELL, NYSELAT, TC Baseline and Periodic Reading and Writing Assessments, formal and informal writing samples, and conferencing is used to determine the needs of individual ELL students. These students then receive services both in and out of the classroom that are specifically aligned to their needs that have surfaced during these assessments. Examples of these services include integrated and stand-alone pull-out ELL instruction, specified time to utilize Imagine Learning and Reading A-Z technology programs, and additional small group support in an after school led by the ELL teacher. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL, NYSELAT, TC Baseline and Periodic Reading and Writing Assessments, formal and informal writing samples, and conferencing are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? All teachers have access to the data and the ELL teacher shares any data gathered outside of their purview to ensure that content are aware of continues need and strengths of ELL students. The ELL teacher and content teachers work together to determine next steps necessary to meet particular student needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154.2, PS 150 utilizes both the freestanding and integrated ENL models. During the freestanding program sessions, 4th and 5th grade ENLS are pulled out four times per week, (180 minutes), and 2nd grade ENLs are pulled twice per week (90 minutes) as mandated. While in these small groups, the ENL teacher utilizes a variety resources and methodologies to address the needs of the students in the groups. The remainder of the ENL classes (22) take place in content specific whole class setting in which the ENL teacher pushes in. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Fourth and fifth grade Entering and Emergent students meet eight times per week, in a combination of push-in and pull-out services, thus fulfilling the weekly 360 minute mandate. Second, third, fourth and fifth grade transitioning and expanding students meet their 180 minute mandates in the same manner. Due to staffing and scheduling constraints (we have only one ENL teacher), the commanding level K students are short of one period of ENL instruction per week. This shortage, however, is supplemented through the use of an online ENL program, Imagine Learning, In addition, second grade emerging and entering students are short two periods per week of ENL instruction. Both, however, attend two -day a week after school ENL instruction. The language of instruction in the content areas is English, and all teachers receive continued development on effective ENL strategies to facilitate students' academic academic achievement and acquisition of the English language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. During integrated ENL instruction, the ENL teacher, who has already co-planned with the primary teacher, works with ENL students in small group instruction during the lesson and independent practice time to facilitate comprehension of the content. During stand alone instruction, the ENL teacher tailors specific lessons and resources to meet the individual needs of the students in the standalone group. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When applicable, students receive assessments in their home language (i.e. the State Math exam and science exams). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instructional differentiation Since SIFE traditionally fall behind in academics, we expect them to benefit from the array of programs at the school: The Making Meaning program at PS 150 allows ELLs to interact with texts and and have conversations with peers who they are comfortable with. For SIFE with limited conversational English, home language are encouraged for interpreting the text. Assessments of SIFE take different forms. There are quizzes, participation in classroom discussions, response to literature in first language, and using graphic organizers to represent ideas. ELLs' instructional groups change as their proficient levels change. With these changes, students meet new groups with new ideas to share. Finally, we have bilingual and dual language books and leveled books in different genres for ELLs to access during independent reading Newcomer ELLs Part of differentiation literacy activities, for ELLs in this group, include SIPPS (phonics instruction), quizzes, directed reading, intensive audio-visual instructional support and the use of bilingual texts. Developing ELLs ELLs in this group will use technology as a tool of independent learning. They will search for meaning of difficult words online on their own. Students will do quick write and utilize graphic organizer to construct meanings from the text. Students' writings will tap into background knowledge and culture to stimulate interest. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Long Term ELLs Use variety of questioning techniques to expand student thinking. Use of home language strategies to support English learning. Use of oral language, as in turn and talk to engage and challenge student thinking. Use quickwrite to develop writing stamina. Former ELLs up to two years exiting ELL status We will engage long-term ELLs with high-interest activities and texts. We will use native language materials to support English language learning. We will ask open-ended questions that expand students thinking. Students will do peer assessing to compare thinking and to build knowledge. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ENL-SWDs use visuals, scaffolding and differentiation techniques in accordance with the students' IEP to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. We use ENL strategies and available materials (including bilingual texts) for ENLs instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Student centered curricula and instruction at PS 150 sets high expectation for ELL-SWDs. Instruction and curricula are not watered down for these students, rather they achieve English-Only and general population students' goals from routes that are accessible to them. We use ELL strategies and available materials (including bilingual texts) for ELLs instruction. We follow students' IEP goals, and we group students for meaningful productive outcomes. Groups are small with interactive instructional activities. The schedule for individual students is modified when to ensure that the needs of all ELL students are met (i.e an ELL from one class joins into a another same grade class to receive his/her integrated instruction) 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ELLs receive individualized support based on data during guided reading. In addition, ELLs needing more intense language acquisition support, (e.g. entering and emerging ELLs) recieve additional support through the use of the Imagine Learning On-line program and are a part of the ELL after school language program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Imagine and the after school ELL programs are new additions to our ENL instructional program. We are monitoring the progress of our ELL students to see the efficacy of these programs and make adjustments when necessary. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? PS 150 has never offered a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs at PS 150 are represented in all the school curricula and extra curricula activities. ELLs, including those with special needs, have access to all the subjects in the school, which include, language arts, math, social studies, science, physical education, and computer technology,. In addition, the push-in aspect of the ESL services provides the ELLs an opportunity to access the same curriculum and instruction as the English-only students. Thus, ELLs may achieve the same goals as the English-only students. ELLs also have access to additional academic support through our after school ELL program which is foundational (e.g.improving letter/ sound identification, building phonemic awareness, mastering basic verbs and nouns and and teaching basic English grammar), as well as our implementation of the Imagine Learning, online language development program. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in conferences of concern to their children through translated notices and interpreters. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Bilingual and Dual Language library Computers, Smartboard TCRWP REACH program by National Geographic Imagine Learning Online Program 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered at PS 150 by encouraging ELLs to explore and utilize their native language and culture as background knowledge. Research shows that a wealth of knowledge in native language and culture can support second language learning. For this reason,whenever possible, we have materials in students' language for their enjoyment, for use in response to literature, and for content area learning. ELLs have access to dictionaries in their languages. Native language support At PS 150, we encourage ELLs to explore and utilize their native language and culture as background knowledge. Research shows that a wealth of knowledge in native language and culture can support second language learning. For this reason, we have materials in students' language for their enjoyment, for use in response to literature, and for content area learning. ELLs have access to dictionaries in their languages. If certain ELLs require the services of a bilingual para, we will provide it. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our bilingual and and dual language books are age appropriate with varying difficulty levels. They also explore many themes that are of interest to K- 5 ELLs such as sports, history, myth, and fashion. Our leveled books run from A-Z and contain visual aides such as illustrations, charts and photographs to engender comprehension. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Bilingual and Dual Language library Computers, Smartboard Making Meaning ReadyGen TCRWP REACH program by National Geographic Language Power 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At PS 150, both the school secretary, the parent coordinator and the ENL teacher assist newly enrolled ELLs with paperwork if needed and arrange for interpreter if needed, review Home Language Survey for updates, access exam history for understanding of ELL eligibility or program placement and update classroom teachers of their incoming new ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 150 offers no electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS 150 does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All PS 150 teachers participate in professional development focused on improving instruction of ENL students, in light of the demands on the Common Core. The ENL teacher also attends off-site PD offered by the network and any additional trainings that support ENL instruction. He turn-keys the information gathered upon return from these professional development sessions to strengthen the ENL teaching practices of the entire community. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS 150 offers instructional and professional developments (ID/PD) in ELL. ID/PDs focus on teachers and paraprofessional roles, instructional delivery for ELLs, instructional and assessment equity for ELLs, cultural responsive teaching, and the goal of creating ELLs who will be self-directed learners. In order to support the pedagogical personnel with ELLs' transition from elementary to middle and high schools, teachers of graduating ELLs at the advanced and transitional levels are considered for more in depth English learning. They will utilize text and technology based programs. Also, pedagogical staff dealing with ELLs at the beginning and intermediate levels of proficiency are trained to teach ELLs the subject content that is available to English-only students, with modified language or difficulty level. Teachers and paraprofessional receive mandatory trainings in ENL methodologies and assessment tool for ELLs. The ENL teacher attends DOE sponsored PD workshops throughout the year to support and enhance ELL-specific professional skills and to stay up to date with the latest ENL field developments. Strategies and techniques learned at PD's are then turn-keyed to the teaching staff at in house PD's. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs occur during the Parent Engagement provided by the DOE or during scheduled appointments established between individual ELL parents and the ENL teacher. During these meetings, the language development progress of the student is discussed and displayed by showing student work in all of the content areas including test and quiz scores. Also discussed are the students strengths and weaknesses. If needed, interpretation and translation services are provided by staff at PS 150 or through the DOE. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parental involvement in the school is an area of continued development. Our ENL teacher will reach out to ELL parents prior to each PA meeting. Interpreters are available at each parent meeting. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tracey Quarles, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 150 School DBN: 23K150 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tracey Quarles Title Principal Amy Bardales Assistant Principal Zena Conyers Parent Coordinator Patrick Walsh ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Cisse Parent Tammie Stephens/GE Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Green/SpEd Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Graham Nicole Graham Coach Coach Tracy Adams School Counselor Miatheresa Pate N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 01/08/18 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K150 School Name: PS 150 Superintendent: M. deGovia The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) and Studen Emergency Contact Cards are both used to determine the language preference of the parent community for written and oral communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Parents preferred languages for written and Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  oral communication include: Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Survey Forms, Entitlement and Continued Entitlement Letters, newsletters, cell phone policy, Parent Handbook, monthly parent calendars 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The school will conduct 4 Parent-Teacher Conferences. The school will conduct monthly parent workshops and monthly Principal-Parent workshops. Informal parent meetings take place in the morning during our school-wide Town Hall Meetings and after school at dismissal. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A welcome poster in multiple language is posted in the lobby. We also post and distribute Parent's Guides to Language Access in the main lobby. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator will create a survey and survey parents twice a year (Fall and Spring) aobut the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 
