2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K160 School Name: P.S. 160 WILLIAM T. SAMPSON Principal: MARGARET RUSSO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information William T. Sampson 332000010160 Kindergarten – Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 20K160 1057 52 nd Street, Brooklyn, NY 11219 718-438-0337 718-871-7920 Phone Number: Fax: Margaret M. Russo mrusso@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Margaret M. Russo Kontessa Drossos Xue Ling Lin Kontessa Drossos Yun Jiang N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-3910 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauriciere deGovia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@gmail.com Executive Director’s Email Address: 7187594862 Phone Number: 7187594960 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Margaret M. Russo Kontessa Drossos Xue Ling Lin Yun Mei Jiang Arlene Russo Qin Chen N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Wen Ming Chen Member/ Parent SaiYunDong Juan Huang Erin Lew Weng Qing Lin Jing Ping Lin Miriam Quiles Kristin Wells Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Schools Counselor Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher/ ENL Coordinator Member/ Teacher/ Data Specialist Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision : Our school is a community of learners who are committed to helping each child reach their personal best. Our educators seek opportunities to grow in their craft and share best practices. We recognize and value the contribution of our parents/guardians/ caregivers as fellow educators of their children. Our ongoing conversations are centered on our belief that every individual has the fundamental right to a quality education based on rigorous academics infused with the arts and an understanding of citizenship and community service. 2018-19 CEP 9  Mission: All children at P.S. 160 will grow and learn with the help of our families, teachers and school community. Together we will work hard to achieve rigorous standards, celebrate each individual and create a caring environment which lays the foundation for college and career readiness, creating life-long learners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P. S. 160K is a Kindergarten through Grade 5 school located in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn. Our population is approximately 1245 students, of these, 921 (sixty-seven percent) have been identified as mandated English Language Learners. Ninety-three percent of our students speak a language other than English at home. There are twenty languages spoken by the families of P.S. 160. The cultures represented in the school are celebrated by our staff and students. Our staff works tirelessly to advocate for and empower families, giving them opportunities for authentic participation in their child’s school life. There are fifteen English as a Second Language (E.S.L.) certified teachers servicing 921 students in grades kindergarten through Grade 5, seven Chinese Bilingual certified teachers servicing 177 students in kindergarten, grade one, grade two and three. Twelve Special Education certified teachers servicing 128 children in self-contained 12:1:1, Integrated Co- Teaching classes and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS). A pedagogical staff of ninety-four full time teachers supports instruction in grades Kindergarten through five. In addition to the regular classroom teachers, there are cluster teachers who provide instruction in Drama, Music, Physical Education, Science, Technology and Visual Arts. Pull-out/push-in services are provided by teachers in E.S.L., Literacy, Reading Recovery, Guidance, Speech and Early Reading Intervention in Classrooms. One Reading Recovery teacher services Grade 1 at-risk students and two Special Education teachers instruct SETSS students in either an I.E.P. mandated or at-risk format. 100% of our teachers have been trained in the Orton-Gillingham approach. The Orton-Gillingham methodology uses phonetics and emphasizes visual, auditory and kinesthetic learning styles. One hundred twenty eight children have IEP mandates. Other support personnel include 4.6 speech therapists, part time Vision and Hearing teachers, occupational and physical therapists. We are especially proud of our extracurricular programs at P.S. 160K which include the following clubs: Art, Chinese Dance, Chess, Computer, / STEM, Dance, Drama, Chorus, Honor Guard, Math Enrichment, Multicultural Club, Peer Assisted Learning (PALs), and Student Council. Three of our students won Brooklyn Art this year. Their work was on display in Brooklyn Borough Hall. For the second year in a row, one of our students won PS Art and her work is on display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Our Chess Team competed in the National Championship in Nashville Tennessee and competed in tournaments across New York City. Our Ballroom Dance Team advanced all the way to the finals in the city-wide competition. Additionally, we have before school and after school literacy, math and ESL instruction as well as Saturday literacy, ESL and math classes. We have partnerships with the following organizations: Arts Connection, which provides instruction in Chinese Dance,and Mexican Dance for our second, third and fourth grade students. Chess in the City, which provides chess instruction to all second and third grade classes. Dancing Classrooms, which provides instruction in ballroom dance to our fifth grade students. Maimonides Hospital which partners with us for our annual Health Fair and parent workshops. 2018-19 CEP 10  The Council for Living Music which provides violin instruction to our first, second, third, fourth and fifth graders. In the spirit of the Chancellor’s vision for New York City Public Schools, we have an extensive Family Involvement program. In addition to the four required Parent Teacher Conferences and Tuesday outreach, all teachers are required to invite school families into their classrooms a minimum of one time per month. We have additional professional performances open to our school community, as well as, Arts workshops, Math Nights, Movie Nights, and Multicultural Nights. Families are invited to attend ESL classes on Saturdays throughout the year and child care is provided. Summer 2018 we started GED classes for our school community. During the Saturday classes, the principal conducts a short question and answer program where families may voice their concerns or suggestions about the school. We have received a very positive response to this forum. Our Parent Lending Library is open three mornings per week as well as on Saturdays. Workshops are conducted throughout the year on Bullying and Cyber Bullying, Common Core State Standards, Homework Tips, How to help your Children at Home, The Middle School Process, “How to Speak so Your Children Will Listen and How to Listen so Your Children Will Speak”, Positive Discipline, Parent Coping Skills, and Early Childhood Speech Development. We have surveyed our school families and will develop additional workshops for the 2018 – 2019 school year based on the survey responses. We have added GED classes to our parent / family programs as this has been a need indicated by our school families. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P. S. 160K is a Kindergarten through Grade 5 school located in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn. Our population is approximately 1245 students, of these, 921 (sixty-seven percent) have been identified as mandated English Language Learners. Ninety-three percent of our students speak a language other than English at home. There are twenty languages spoken by the families of P.S. 160. The cultures represented in the school are celebrated by our staff and students. Our staff works tirelessly to advocate for families, giving them opportunities for authentic participation in their child’s school life. One hundred twenty eight children have IEP mandates. Other support personnel include 4.6 speech therapists, part time Vision and Hearing teachers, occupational and physical therapists. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school made the most progress in the Strong Family-Community Ties element of the Framework for Great Schools. We will continue our focus in this area this year as well as continue to provides rigorous instruction and teacher collaboration. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K160 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1274 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 46 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 22 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.8% % Reduced Lunch 64.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.2% 8.2% 3.8% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 1% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 55.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 59 59 27 97.8% 0.2% 11.9% 0.6% 87.0% 0.3% 6 3% 6.7 70.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A NO N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Language development continues to be the instructional focus of PS 160 due to the high percentage of English Language Learners that attend. The school has several programs in place that support the social and academic growth of English Language Learners. Academic support programs for English Language Learners are offered throughout the year on Saturdays, after school, mornings before school begins and on school breaks. The school plans to build upon last year’s goal of incorporating project based learning into the curriculum where students work in teams on meaningful projects. These projects engage students interests and promote questioning and discussion. All students in the school also take part in Paideia Seminar which is a process of thoughtful dialogue and structured discussion that helps to develop both social and critical thinking skills. This past year the school implemented a balanced literacy curriculum in all grades and has seen the number of students school wide reading on or above grade level standard increase by 11% from June 2017, as measured by Fountas and Pinnell formal reading assessments. Several indicators speak to the quality of instruction at PS 160 for all levels of learners. End of year Advance Measures of Teacher Practice reflect overall scores of 3.31 in Designing Coherent Instruction and 3.33 in Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide reflected an improvement in Rigorous Instruction from 3.80 to 3.96 in Survey Element Scores and a 3.95 to 3.99 in Framework Element Scores. Common Core Shifts in Literacy and Math both received scores of 4.20, exceeding both district and city averages. Most recent Quality Review indicators reflect ratings of Well Developed in Curriculum and Proficient in Teaching and Learning Effectiveness. The school maintains a challenging and rigorous curriculum. 2018 state assessment scores reflect significant increases in proficiency levels in ELA with respect to the following groups of students: All Students (9% increase), General Education Students (11% increase), Students with Disabilities (10% increase) and English Language Learners (16% increase). Prior to 2018, the All Students group saw an increase in proficiency from 37% in 2015 to 45% in 2016 and remained at 45% in 2017. General Education Students increased proficiency levels from 39% in 2015 to 47% in 2016 to 49% in 2017. Special Education Students increased from 10% in 2015 to 13% in both 2016 and 2017. The only group to show a decrease in proficiency over this time period were Current ELL students. This group reflected proficiency levels of 27% in 2015, 22% in 2016 and 14% in 2017. This year, the school seeks to continue the significant progress in literacy that was made by it's current ELL population in 2017-18 (16%). This increase resulted in a 30% proficiency level for this group. The progress of the school’s current ELL population is the focus for this year’s instructional goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 13  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the support of advanced literacy strategies, 30% of ENL students will score a level 3 or 4 on the NYS English Language Arts Assessment as measured by 2019 NYS ELA test data. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will create ENL Data Inquiry Teams on grades 3, 4 and 5 to analyze ENL testing data and create targeted instructional plans for individual learners and groups of students within ENL Proficiency levels. The teams will use the results of benchmark assessments to address knowledge gaps in ways that represent what students might face on high stakes exams. Students will receive ENL services both individually and in group settings on a daily basis based on their language proficiency levels. Extracurricular ENL Programs will support English Language Learner improvement in Literacy. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ENL Teachers Monthly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Data Specialist ENL Students Daily ENL Teachers, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Coordinator ENL Students Weekly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Coordinator, ENL Teachers The current Teachers College balanced literacy program in place will continue to provide built in time for working with students individually and in small groups at varying levels of language development according to student need. ENL Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Coaches, Classroom Teachers, Time will be built into the schedule for classroom teachers and ESL teachers to communicate with one other on student progress and plan for targeted instruction. Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers ENL Teachers Weekly Administration Sept. 2018-June 2019 Test sophistication lessons will be built into the curriculum on a weekly basis throughout the year. Students will be exposed to different item types and questions that they are likely to see on state assessments with a focus on Academic Language. ENL Students Weekly Classroom Teachers, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Teachers, Literacy Coaches ENL students will use technology to practice skills and concepts needed for high stakes testing. ENL Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will conduct ENL parent workshops, beginning of year curriculum presentations in all subject areas, classroom publishing parties at the completion of units of study, monthly classroom family involvement activities and workshops for families in helping their children academically from home. At the beginning of the year, the school publishes a calendar of weekly family workshops and presentations for the upcoming school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. One full-time ENL Coordinator, One Full-time Data Coach, 15 Full time ENL Teachers, Three Assistant Principals, Two full-time Literacy Coaches, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Curriculum, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the number of ENL students in grades 3-5 scoring a level 3 or 4 on the Ready NY Interim Assessment will increase by 5% as measured by Beginning of Year and Middle of Year Ready NY Interim Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Ready NY Interim Assessments - Beginning of Year and Middle of Year Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school’s 2017-18 School Quality Guide reflects a score of 4.08 overall in the Framework area of Supportive Environment. Specifically the school received 4.18 for peer support for academic work, 4.20 for Safety, 4.00 for Behavior and 3.92 for Social Emotional, all exceeding district and city averages. Most recent Quality Review measures indicate a score of 4.99 in high expectations being communicated to students and staff. The school’s guidance department along with teachers and administration is dedicated to supporting the social and emotional health of our students. The guidance department conducts routine visits to classrooms, addressing the students on good behavior. They also conduct parent workshops on positive parenting and managing behaviors at home. They collaborate with classroom teachers to create behavior plans for students that are frequently involved in behavior incidents. Counselors provide professional development for teachers in classroom management and mental health. They provide referrals for parents to community based organizations as needed. This past year, the counseling department piloted a successful social skills program in which students in grades 4 and 5 were trained to serve as role models to younger students identified by classroom teachers as needing help with social skills. The older students modeled appropriate social behaviors such as sharing, taking turns, listening and cooperation. These student groups met during lunch periods under the supervision of the guidance department. An expansion of this program would allow for more students to be serviced. This area received a score of 4.0 (84% positive) on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide with scores of 76% in listening, 80% in paying attention and 82% in behavior. The school saw a 3% improvement in overall student behavior in 2017 to 2018 as measured by student report card data. This goal builds upon the 2017-18 goal of improving student behavior grades on report cards and also seeks to improve the score of 3.92 in the social emotional component of the NYC School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 160’s SMILES Program (Students Making Improvement Learning Emotionally and Socially) will service a total of 32 students as measured by attendance sheets, notes and guidance department documentation. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students in grade 3 will be trained by the counseling staff to work with younger groups of students on social skills. Students will take part in activities requiring listening, taking turns and cooperating with one another. Students targeted for the SMILES program will be referred by the Pupil Personnel Team. These will be students who do not require formal counseling sessions but would benefit from socialization with their well behaved peers. Each counselor will supervise a maximum group size of 8 students in one session. Activities will be tailored to meet the ability levels of the younger students involved in the program. Students in Grades 4 and 5 Weekly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Department Staff and Classroom Teachers Students exhibiting problem social behaviors  Routine classroom visits by the guidance department addressing students on good behavior. Translation will be provided as needed. Students in grades K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Department Staff and Teachers  Individual and group workshops for parents on positive parenting and managing behaviors at home. Meetings and workshops will be translated as needed. Parents of students in grades K-5 October 2018 and as needed Guidance Department Staff  Implement at-risk counseling services for students involved in repeated behavior incidents. Counseling will be provided in student's native language as needed.  Collaboration with classroom teachers to create behavior plans for students that are frequently involved in behavior incidents. All home school correspondence will be translated as needed. Sept. 2018- June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Department Staff and Pupil Personnel Team Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance Department Classroom Teachers Students involved in repeated behavior incidents Students involved in repeated behavior incidents 2018-19 CEP 18  Professional development for teachers in classroom management and mental health. Classroom teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance department and community organizations.  Provide referrals for parents to community based organizations as needed. Parent communication will be translated as needed. Parents of students in grades K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance department 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Counselors will meet with families of all students participating in the SMILES program. An October workshop will be held for parents on positive parenting and behavior management. Individual parent meetings to discuss student behavior will take place as needed throughout the year. Interactive behavior plans will be put in place, as needed, communicating student progress to parents.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principal, Three full-time School Counselors, PPT Team consisting of teachers, school counselors, administration, Data Specialist and ENL Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, PS 160’s SMILES Program (Students Making Improvements by Learning Emotional and Social Skills) will service a total of 16 students as measured by attendance sheets, notes and guidance department documentation. Student progress in the program will be reflected through beginning of year and middle of year classroom teacher reflection sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Guidance department documentation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-18 the school rolled out a new balanced literacy curriculum in all grades. Coaching positions at the school were established and coaches provided support to all teachers in using the new curriculum. Lab classrooms were established on each grade level for the purposes of modeling lessons and inter-class visitations. Classroom teachers met weekly in data inquiry teams to analyze student work products produced in the workshop and to plan further instruction. This year’s goal seeks to build upon the establishment of these grade level inquiry teams by bringing in the expertise of the ENL teacher group and focusing on the specific academic concerns of this student group. This inquiry group will provide a means for ENL teachers on grades 3-5 to work together on grade level teams to discuss issues affecting ENL student progress in class and on state assessments . This goal speaks to the area of the School Quality Guide involving teachers making a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching and instruction with other grade levels - 87% positive on the 2017-18 NYC School Survey Measures. Oral language development remains a constant focus for the school and every year, new measures are established to support ENL students in this area. Teachers continue to express concern over the quality of student discussion on the NYC School Survey – 3.60 (75%) overall. This includes students’ ability to use text references to support their ideas, their ability to build on one another's ideas during class discussions and their ability to provide feedback to their peers and teachers. ENL inquiry teams will analyze data and plan for further instruction for this specific subgroup of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all ENL teachers on grades 3-5 will be part of an ENL Data Inquiry Team with a focus on ENL student progress in literacy and will have met a minimum of 20 times, as measured by sign in sheets, agendas, meeting notes and planning documents. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  ENL teachers on grades 3-5 will take part in data inquiry ENL Teachers Monthly teams. All ENL teachers on each grade will meet together as a team. A goal for these teams is to develop stronger collaborative partnerships with other educators in the school. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, ENL Teachers ENL teachers on all grades will meet with classroom teachers to discuss student progress and plan for integrated classroom instruction. ENL teachers will analyze literacy data for their students and prioritize learning needs. They will work together to create action plans and plan for targeted instruction that responds to the strengths and needs of students within students' individual language proficiency levels. ENL Data Inquiry teams will implement clear processes, procedures and protocols. ENL Teachers, Classroom Weekly Administration, Sept. 2018-June ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers Teachers 2019 ENL Teachers Weekly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Teachers , Data Specialist ENL Teachers Weekly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Teachers Teams will produce actionable items for the classroom that will improve student achievement. ENL Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Time will be built into the school schedule for articulation and communication between ENL and classroom teachers. All teachers are teachers of language and should support one another within communities of practice. One focus for these teams will be to analyze the academic language demands involved in grade level teaching and learning and how best to meet the academic language needs of our ENL students. ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers ENL Teachers Weekly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers ENL Teachers Weekly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 ENL Teachers 2018-19 CEP 22  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The ENL Department will hold informational meetings for parents at the beginning of the school year on topics specific to the ENL programs offered in the school. The school will provide parent literacy workshops and presentations on topics specific to ENL students. The times and topics of these workshops will be communicated to parents as they are scheduled. ENL teachers will also hold individual parent meetings to discuss their student’s progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, ENL Teachers, ENL Coordinator, Data Specialist Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all ENL teachers on grades 3-5 will be part of a Data Inquiry Team which will have met together a minimum of 10 times, as measured by sign in sheets, agendas and meeting notes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ENL Data Inquiry team sign-in sheets, agendas and meeting notes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-18 School Quality Guide survey measures continue to show effective school leadership with a score of 4.36 overall, well above district and city averages. Families score 99% positive for the principal in inclusive leadership, 98% positive for instructional leadership and 95% positive for program coherence. Effective leaders make good use of the skills and knowledge of their faculty and encourage many adults in the school community to step into leadership roles and responsibilities. Newly established coaching positions, lab classrooms and grade leader positions have brought more teachers into leadership positions within the school in 2017-18. Effective leaders also ensure that teachers do not work in isolation but are able to collaborate and are able to help one another improve their instructional practice. With the adoption of the Teachers College literacy curriculum, teachers on all grades attend professional development and workshops which they turn-key information to their colleagues on an ongoing basis. The 2017-18 School Quality Guide NYC Survey Measures reflect teacher concern over the quality of student discussion with a score of 3.60 – 75% positive in this area. Although this is an improvement from 2016-17 with a score of 2.74 – 71% positive, there is still room for improvement in this area. More time this past year was devoted to student discussion in the classroom within the new curriculum and with all students taking part in Paideia Seminar formal discussions in all classes a minimum of once a month. This year’s goal focuses on the leadership quality of improving instruction. Based on frequent classroom visits, school leaders determined questioning and discussion to be an area in need of improvement and will seek to create opportunities for teacher collaboration and learning in this area. Danielson Domain 3b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques on teachers’ overall Advance Measures of Teacher Practice remains one of the lower scoring areas of the Framework which is why it will be a leadership focus in 2018-19. The overall average in this domain for teachers in 2017-18 was 3.32. Oral language required for student discussions is a challenging area for educators of ENL students. Teachers will benefit from the continued support focused on this indicator. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 160's Advance Overall Teacher rating in Domain 3b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques will increase by 5% as measured by 2018-19 Advance Overall Teacher ratings in this domain. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers in all subject areas will conduct Paideia Seminars a minimum of once a month. All Students Monthly Administration, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, Cluster Teachers, National Paideia Center Students will take part in literature circles and book clubs during their classroom independent reading time. Alll Students Weekly Literacy Coaches, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers All classrooms will take part in at least one project based learning unit of study in social studies. All Students March 2019- Classroom Teachers, June 2019 National Paideia Center Teachers will provide scaffolded assignments and assessments with a variety of higher order questions for all student levels. All Students Sept. Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers 2018-June 2019 All teachers will receive professional development on Questioning and Discussion techniques. Classroom Teachers, November Literacy Coaches, ENL Teachers 2018-May 2019 National Paideia Question analysis and creation will be an integral part of all test sophistication preparation. Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers Center Weekly Literacy Coaches Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration will encourage learning walks and instructional rounds around questioning and discussion in the classroom. Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers Sept. Administration, 2018-June 2019 Literacy Coaches 2018-19 CEP 25 Teachers on every grade will work as teams, sharing ideas and helping one another to improve. Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers Weekly Sept. Administration, Literacy Coaches 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited into classrooms to take part in literacy lessons and Paideia seminars on a monthly basis. The school will also offer parent workshops on discussing books with your children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration consisting of Principal and three full-time Assistant Principals, ENL Teachers, two Literacy Coaches, Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum, Professional Resources from the Paideia Association. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Advance Measures of Teacher Practice Domain 3b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques will increase by 2.5% as measured by Advance overall Measures of Teacher Practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Measures of Teacher Practice Ratings Middle of Year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 160 seeks to continue to encourage strong family community ties. Parents and families are invited to attend monthly PTA meetings as well as performances, weekly parent outreach presentations, monthly classroom family involvement opportunities and various workshops and classes on parenting, nutrition, etc. There are opportunities for families to volunteer at PTA hosted events such as plant sales, picture days and various holiday activities. On the 2017-18 School Quality Guide Survey Measures, the school scored high in the areas of outreach to parents – 4.0 (97% positive). Scores for parent-principal trust were 4.80 (99% positive) and teacher-principal trust – 4.50 (97% positive). Latest Quality Review data reflects a well developed (4.99) in the school’s effectiveness in partnering with families to support student success. This year, the school seeks to increase attendance at all family involvement opportunities, including opportunities for families to volunteer time to support the school. This particular area scored 56% on the 2017-18 School Quality Guide. Family involvement opportunities are an important part of the home-school partnership and we would like to see more families attending them on a regular basis. This goal builds upon last year’s goal of increasing school presentations by community based organizations. This was a successful goal and served to provide greater opportunities for family involvement through the resources in our community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, attendance at all family involvement opportunities will increase by 5% as measured by sign in sheets and attendance documents from all family involvement opportunities for the 2018-19 school year. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will create an advance schedule of all PTA meetings and weekly parent outreach opportunities and communicate this to families so they can have more time to plan for attendance at these school events. Families, Students and Staff of PS 160 Families will be invited to student performances on all grade levels. Each grade will be responsible for one performance during the year. The school will advertise opportunities for family involvement well in advance so families can make preparations they need to be able to attend. The school will conduct parent workshops and offer opportunities to hear guest speakers. Families, Students and Staff of PS 160 Families, Students and Staff of PS 160 Families of PS 160 Sept. 2018- October 2018 Monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Weekly/ Monthly Sept. 2018-June 2019 The school will implement new methods of communicating with families to inform them of upcoming opportunities for involvement. Families of PS 160 Sept. 2018-June 2019 The school will conduct a survey asking families what would make them more likely to attend family involvement opportunities on a regular basis. Families of PS 160 November 2018 Administration, Administrative Support Staff and School Secretaries Administration, Classroom Teachers, Art, Drama and Music Teachers Administration, Administrative Support Staff, School Secretaries and Parent Coordinator Administration, Classroom teachers, cluster subject teachers, ENL teachers, special education, guidance and speech dept. staff Administration, Administrative Support Staff, School Secretaries and Parent Coordinator Administration, Administrative Support Staff and School Secretaries 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school will offer a variety of incentives for parents and family members to attend meetings such as varying the agenda and time the meetings are held. Student performances, parent workshops and information presentations will also be a part of meetings on an ongoing basis. The school will also attempt to communicate more effectively with families when announcing upcoming meetings and family events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Administration, specialty teachers (Art, Dance, Drama, Music). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance at all PS 160's family involvement opportunities will increase by 2.5% as measured by sign in sheets and attendance documents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family Attendance Documents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Recovery One to One During school day Orton-Gillingham Small Group During school day One to One and Small Group Small Group Small Group Small Group After school/ During the school day During the school day Before school/ after school During the school day and after school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Eligibility based on end of year data from previous school year and beginning of year assessment data. Eligibility also determined by teacher recommendation based on formative assessments and classroom observations. Literacy Plus ERIC At Risk SETSS ENL Literacy Small Group Literacy through Arts Math AIS Small Group Math Plus Small Group During the school day After school/ Saturday Mathematics Eligibility based on end of year data from previous school year and beginning of year assessment data. Eligibility also determined by teacher recommendation based on formative assessments and 2018-19 CEP 30 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) classroom observations. Eligibility based on end of year data from previous school year and beginning of year assessment data. Eligibility also determined by teacher recommendation based on formative assessments and classroom observations. Eligibility also determined by teacher recommendation and based on formative classroom observations by service providers. At risk counseling In-class counseling sessions Enrichment Small Group During the school day and after school Multi-Culture Club Small Group Mythology Club Small Group Chinese Culture Club Small Group School Leadership – Student Council Small Group Small Group At risk speech At risk guidance Individual and Small Group During the school day Individual and Small group During the school day Individual/ Small Group and Family During the school day and after school Whole Class During the school day 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with uniforms, supplies, clothing for special events and activities, admissions to all trips and activities, yearbooks, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. P.S. 160 maintains relationships with local universities resulting in the placement of student observers and student teachers in our school. We work with the universities to ensure a high level of teacher preparation. Many former student teachers are recruited as full time teachers when their university work is completed. New teachers are assigned a mentor teacher to support them in the beginning stages of their career. Professional development is on-going. Teachers meet for a full day Professional Learning Communities ( PLC) with coaches and administrators every 4-6 weeks. In compliance with the 2014 UFT Memorandum of Agreement, on Mondays when school is in session there is an 80 minute block of Professional Development immediately following the conclusion of the school day. This Professional Development is collaboratively developed and differentiated to support teachers. Additionally, teachers are encouraged to attend professional development and outside workshops and conferences. Information gained at these conferences is then turn keyed to colleagues at PLCs. Assignments are based on the UFT contract and administrative decision in consultation with the teacher. We provide resources and professional development to maintain highly qualified teachers on our staff. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is on-going. Teachers meet for a full day PLC with coaches and administrators every 4-6 weeks. In compliance with the 2014 UFT Memorandum of Agreement, on Mondays when school is in session there is an 80 minute block of Professional Development and Inquiry work immediately following the conclusion of the school day. This Professional Development is collaboratively developed and differentiated to support teachers. A school Professional Development Committee, consisting of teachers across grades, plans for Monday Professional Development and Inquiry. Additionally, teachers and other staff members are encouraged to attend CFN professional development and outside workshops and conferences. Information gained at these conferences is then turn keyed to colleagues at PLCs. Every grade has at least two common preparation periods per week to meet in teacher teams for planning purposes. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 34  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). All registered kindergarten students receive an information packet in the mail during the summer outlining expectations for the fall. NYSITELL is administered to incoming kindergarten children before the term begins. The first parent/guardian meeting for kindergarten parents/guardians takes place the first day of school. Curriculum conferences for kindergarten children take place within ten days of the start of school. All kindergarten classes invite families into their classrooms a minimum of once per month. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Decision making regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures are determined during teacher team Professional Learning Community (PLCs) sessions and other teacher team meetings. Teachers meet in monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) to analyze student work samples and formative assessments in order to adjust current curriculum plans and plan further assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2018-19 CEP 35  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 1,111,789 103,393 115,790 0 8,405932 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7 5A 5A, 5E N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 36   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 160, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 160 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, ESL Classes, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; In compliance with the 2014 UFT Memorandum of agreement, on Tuesdays 2018-19 CEP 39  when school is in session there will be a 75 minute block immediately following the conclusion of the school day that consists of 40 minutes for parent engagement activities; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events on a monthly basis; ● establishing a lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter and web site designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; Web site will include curriculum overviews and links to other web sites to support parent participation in their child’s progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 160, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality, rigorous instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences four times yearly during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● in compliance with the 2014 UFT Memorandum of agreement, on Tuesdays when school is in session there will be a 75 minute block immediately following the conclusion of the school day that consists of 40 minutes for parent engagement activities; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● In compliance with the 2014 UFT Memorandum of agreement, on Tuesdays when school is in session there will be a 75 minute block immediately following the conclusion of the school day that consists of 40 minutes for parent engagement activities; ● Teachers will have links on the school website that parents may access; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; monthly family involvement days Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations, including wearing their uniform daily, and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: Created by the 2014 – 2015 Student Council ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● pay attention and participate in class; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● study and practice so I can achieve my goals; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● communicate with students, teachers and other staff members; ● have a good attitude; ● always try my best to learn; ● “put my heart into it”. 2018-19 CEP 43  2018-19 CEP 44  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 45  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Current student enrollment at Public School 160K is 1279 students encompassing grades Kindergarten through five. Of those students, 776 have been identified as English Language Learners (ELLs). We have an increase in the number of students who move from state to state or back to their native country for extended periods of time. While they have received formal schooling, it is inconsistent even when they are in an English Language School System (ELSS) as they move from school to school within any given state. Due to this inconsistent schooling, many of these students often struggle with literacy skills as well. The demands of the Common Core Learning Standards are also a challenge for our ELL/MLL students. The data used is from the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT exam and Spring 2018 ELA and Math scores as this is the most current data available at this time. An analysis of the spring 2018 NYSESLAT exam demonstrates a need for improvement of expressive language both in the areas of speaking and writing. Therefore, this has created a need for intensive instruction that will develop the linguistic demands and incorporate expressive language strategies in our Title III literacy programs. Supplemental instruction in all Title III programs will be provided in English with native language support. Professional development will be provided by the National Paideia Center focusing on questioning and developing discussion protocols to enhance oral language skills. ENL teachers provide scaffolds to our ELL students at various levels so that they have the language supports needed to participate in these seminars. Teacher materials and resources will be used during professional development training sessions throughout the school year. Supplemental services are necessary in order to provide support and increase student achievement on the New York State English Language Arts (NYS ELA) exam. An analysis of the Spring 2018 NYS ELA exam also demonstrates a need for additional support for our ELL/MLL students. Testing policy for ELLs requires newcomer students to take the NYS ELA after one year of attending an English language school system within the United States. This policy does not afford these students sufficient time to acquire proficiency in English. As a result, many of these students score at a level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA. An analysis of the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results reveal that of the 576 ELL/MLL students in grades 1-5, 53 students scored at the Entering level, 64 students scored at the emerging level, 163 students scored at the transitioning level and 296 students scored at the expanding level. While many of our ELL students demonstrate progress, the data also shows that while there are varying needs based on language proficiency levels, of the 246 ELL/MLL students in grades 3-5, many did not attain proficiency on the speaking and/or writing subtest. This data is based on the raw scores required for each of the subtests on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT. This data is also consistent with the NYS ELA data, which shows a need for improvement in writing. 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Consequently, P.S. 160 will use student data to provide a comprehensive supplemental program for ELLs in order to meet their academic and social needs. These services will be provided through the following programs: Title III ENL Morning Program The Title III ENL Morning Program will service approximately 50 ELL/MLL students at the entering proficiency level in grades 3, 4 and 5. The morning program will meet two days a week for a duration of one hour each session from 7:05 a.m. - 8:05 a.m. for a total of 50 sessions. Our regular school day commences at 8:10 am. Two certified ENL teachers will service ELL students in the Title III ENL Morning Program in English. In order to meet the needs of ELL students in grade 3, 4 and 5 at the entering language proficiency level, these students will be engaged in activities that scaffold the language using social and academic vocabulary embedded in sentence structures. Explicit modeling of language use and function with repeated practice will be included throughout activities across listening, reading, writing and speaking. Orton Gillingham methodologies will be used to provide emergent readers, the reading skills and strategies necessary for these students to improve in the areas of reading and writing. Students will receive scaffolded instruction to increase comprehension as well as develop content and academic vocabulary. Many of these students attained proficiency on the listening, reading on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT, but did not meet the required raw score to achieve proficiency on the speaking and writing subtest. Programs such as Imagine Learning English will be used to provide additional independent practice. Data from this program will be used to guide instruction based on the student needs. These students will continue to receive additional support in listening, reading and writing in order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students will be provided opportunities to practice using key words and phrases within language structures both orally and in writing. Materials and resources such as Windows to Literacy by National Geographic, guided reading materials and Benchmark Explorers will be used to provide support in the content areas. Bilingual materials including bilingual dictionaries, picture dictionaries and other literature materials will be used to provide native language support for ELLs. Materials and resources at various reading levels will be used to meet the needs of these students. Basic teacher resources and supplies will be utilized in all Title III programs as well. Title III ENL Afterschool Program The Title III ENL Afterschool Program will service ELL students in grade 3, 4 and 5 at various language proficiency levels. This program will meet once a week for a duration of two hours from 2:30-4:30 pm. The program will be conducted from October through May for a total of 31 sessions. six certified ENL teachers will provide instruction to approximately 125 students with approximately 15-20 students in each class. A Title III ESL Afterschool Program will service approximately 75 ELL/MLL students in grade 3 at emerging, transitioning and expanding levels once a week for a duration of two hours from 2:30-4:30 pm. This program will be conducted from October through May for a total of 31 sessions. Emerging level ELL/MLL students in grades 3, 4 and 5 will continue to receive scaffolded instruction to provide support as they progress towards meeting the common core learning standards. Scaffolded lessons will include the use of realia, a variety of visual aids and additional resources to facilitate language learning and make content accessible to these students. Transitioning and expanding level students in grades 3, 4 and 5 will be invited to attend this program based on the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA results (including students scoring at level 1 and 2 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information on the NYS ELA and informal assessments. Students in this program will be grouped by language proficiency levels as well as other areas of need based on student data. The program will provide supplemental services outside the mandated requirements as per CR Part 154. Support will be provided to our ELL students that foster independence, build confidence and improve student achievement. It will be planned and carried out to meet the needs of ELL students with a focus on literacy and language skills. Both the NYS ELA and the NYSESLAT results demonstrate a need for ELL students to develop expressive language skills both in speaking and writing. ENL methodologies will be used to provide students with the language structures and the academic language and vocabulary necessary to increase comprehension. MYONEWS technology program will be used to provide scaffolded texts around similar topics. Discussion activity using language stems will be incorporated during lessons. Other methods include building background knowledge, using graphic organizers, chunking text to develop comprehension, use of technology, providing visual aids, and developing vocabulary related to content areas. Opportunities will be provided to students so that they may work collaboratively and practice using the academic language and vocabulary both orally and in writing. Targets of measurements will be used to prepare lessons in order to help the students show progress on the NYSESLAT. NYSESLAT Spring break Program The Title III ENL Spring break Program will service ELL students in grades 2-5 at the transitioning and expanding level. This program will be held for three days during the week of spring break. There will be two sessions each day. Each session will meet two hours a day for a total of four hours. Students will be grouped by language proficiency and reading level. This program structure offers more students the opportunity to participate in this program. A supervisor will be available to coordinate this program and provide support to the staff. Two certified ENL teachers will provide supplemental instruction to approximately 120 ELL students. These students will receive direct instruction in preparation for the NYSESLAT. The Spring 2018 NYSESLAT data demonstrates a need for improvement in the areas of speaking and writing. Instructional strategies incorporating ENL methodologies will be used to integrate precise vocabulary and grammatical structures so that students can expand their use of expressive language. Opportunities for students to participate in class discussions and collaborate with their peers using content related vocabulary will be provided throughout the lessons. Instructional strategies will include building background knowledge, explicit teaching and modeling of grammatical and academic language structures. While this is an area of need, students will also receive additional practice in listening, reading. NYSESLAT practice materials will be used in this program. Saturday ENL Program Our Title III Saturday ENL Program will service ELL students in grades 1 and 2 at various language proficiency levels. This program will be held from December through May. There will be two groups of ELL students serviced during each session. Each group of ELL students will be serviced for two hours with a total of four hours each session. Each group will consist of approximately 12-15 students. Students will be grouped by language proficiency and informal assessment data. Three certified ESL teachers will service students in these groups. Students will receive targeted instruction to improve vocabulary and reading skills. The Spring 2018 NYSESLAT data shows that transitioning and expanding level students demonstrate a need in the areas of reading, writing and speaking. Scaffolded instruction will be provided to these students in order to develop expressive language skills. The Orton Gillingham methodology will 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information be used to provide students who need support with the necessary reading skills and strategies necessary for them to improve their reading levels. Research based programs such as Writing Skills, a program designed to build writing skills and help students develop complex sentence structures in a methodical manner, Benchmark Explorers and National Geographic Windows to Literacy will be used to support reading instruction. Students will be provided opportunities to actively engage in structured academic conversations using vocabulary related to the concepts that are part of our literacy program. Language skills will be integrated in all four modalities. Strategies such as Total Physical Response (TPR), language experience approach and building background knowledge will be incorporated throughout instruction. Vocabulary development strategies such as the use of the Freire model will be used as well. Chinese Dance Club The Title III programs will include a Chinese Dance Club conducted by one certified Bilingual teacher. This Club will include approximately 20-30 ELLs and Former ELLs students in grades 2-5. This program will be conducted for 25 sessions from September through May for a duration of two hours each session. Approximately 80% of our students at P.S. 160 speak a Chinese dialect. Cultural dances are representative of their native country and provide students an opportunity to share their heritage with the school community. Students in this program will learn the cultural history of the Chinese dances as well as the language related to dance forms and purpose. Students will develop listening skills in order to follow instructions when performing these dances. This program provides interactive experiences that lower affective filters and fosters the self-esteem and confidence often needed to improve language learning. Costumes and music materials will be used in this program. Additional materials such as the use of IPADs to facilitate the use of technology programs in groups and independently, headphones and guided reading materials at various levels, bilingual resources and materials, visual aids, NYSESLAT and ELA test prep materials will be used throughout all Title III programs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Approximately 91% of students at P.S. 160K speak a language other than English at home. The push-in model of instruction is intended to support all our ELL students. Common planning time will be afforded to ENL teachers and their collaborative partners. Demographic and enrollment data indicates that our ELL population continues to increase. In order to help our ELL students 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, additional professional development is necessary for all staff members as they are all teachers of ELLs. Professional Learning Community Days (PLC) are scheduled on a monthly basis. Our school has adopted Teachers College, a balanced literacy program aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers and their collaborative partners will meet to plan for instruction and integrate ENL methodology and strategies into this curriculum to provide support during the day. ENL teachers and their classroom teachers will continue to collaborate in order to scaffold the lessons to meet the linguistic demands of the students at various proficiency levels. This will allow our ELL/MLL students to access the text. Ongoing professional development will be conducted throughout the school year to support Title III programs. Professional development will be provided by outside experts to support the use of Imagine Learning and Orton Gillingham methodologies. This professional development will be ongoing and conducted throughout the school year for one hour sessions. Teachers of Title III programs will attend outside professional development sessions provided by RBE-RNs, Department of English Language Learners, Field Support Centers as well as other professional conferences conducted by organizations that support the needs of ELL students and Teachers College. The NYSESLAT results demonstrate a need for students to improve in the area of speaking across grade level. Our ELL students need additional support to develop academic language through discussion. For this reason professional development sessions will be conducted by the National Paideia Center. These sessions will focus on developing academic language through Paideia Socratic Seminars across content areas. Title III funds as well as other school funds will be used to provide professional development to ENL teachers working in Title III programs. Agendas and attendance sheets will be kept on file at school. Professional development provided to ENL teachers and their collaborative partners in the Saturday Title III program will moderate student work to inform instruction. This collaboration is facilitated due to the fact that our ENL teachers are assigned to a grade or contiguous grades. Substitute teachers will be hired to cover the classes of those teachers attending outside professional development sessions. Professional development in this area will focus on developing open ended questions that foster conversation as well as incorporating paideia seminars in the content areas. Professional development topics include: October 2018 Teachers College November 2018 Teachers College PD Review student data and Collaborative planning, Paideia PD December 2018 Teachers College Imagine Learning professional development, Orton Gillingham January 2019 Teachers College, Collaborative planning February 2019 Teachers College, March 2019 Teachers College, Paideia PD, Imagine Learning April 2019 Teachers College, Collaborative Planning May 2019 Paideia PD June 2019 Collaborative Planning 2018-19 CEP 50  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental Engagement Activities: The major languages other than English spoken at P.S. 160K include, but are not limited to, Mandarin, Cantonese, Fukinese, Spanish, Urdu, Albanian, Hungarian, Arabic, Polish, Russian, Bengali and Uzbek. The various cultures represented in the school are visible within the surrounding community as evidenced by local businesses, houses of worship, newspapers and community based organizations. Various Chinese dialects and Spanish are the dominant languages. Our full time Parent Coordinator speaks various Chinese dialects and provides a great deal of support to parents of all ELLs. Bilingual teachers, support staff and bilingual parents also provide support to parents of ELLs. Parents of ELL students are invited to attend ongoing orientation sessions throughout the school year. Monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings (PTA) are held. Translators and translation units are provided during such meetings. ELL parents are informed of school events and educational programs via the School Leadership Team. This team is comprised of administrators, parents and teachers who work collaboratively to make decisions and inform their constituents of the programs within the school. Parent communication is maintained through our school website. In addition to mandated parent orientation meetings and activities, parent engagement activities are offered on a monthly basis in each classroom. Many of our new students are meeting their parents for the first time in four or five years as they are born in the United States and return to their native country at birth. These students will return when they are of school age often to parents working long hours or out of state. We strive to create a risk free environment and provide opportunities for parents to become active participants in their child’s education. Teachers invite families into their classrooms on a monthly basis providing authentic experiences for our parents and students to learn together. Our Parent Coordinator, School Psychologist and community based organizations provide workshops on parenting skills and literacy development. Additionally, school families are invited to attend Math Night (Fall and Spring), Monthly Movie Nights, Chess Night, Parent Computer classes in the spring and our Spring Arts Festivals and Caretakers Breakfast and many other school events. Title III Saturday Family Literacy program will provide classes to parents of ELL students. These classes will conducted every Saturday from October through June. A parallel literacy program is provided to students ages 5 and older is provided by bilingual paraprofessionals guidance counselor and our school psychologist at no cost to Title III, so that their parents can attend their own ENL class. Currently, one certified Bilingual teacher is conducting our Parent ENL class. Each Saturday there will be two sessions. Each session will meet for two hours a day. Each group will consist of approximately 30-40 parents. Parents are grouped by their level of language proficiency. In addition to learning the language, parents are taught life skills such as how to communicate with their child’s teacher, filling out applications and other important skills relevant to their daily experiences. These classes also provide parents a forum and a comfort level that encourages them to ask questions regarding school events, curriculum and other concerns they may have regarding their child’s education. Title III Multicultural Festivals will be conducted twice a year in order to build connections and celebrate our similarities and differences within our school community. It is an opportunity for families to come together and engage in fun activities as a community. During the Multicultural 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Festival, our families participate in arts and crafts activities, dance to music representing various cultures and share a meal together. Parents and students are proud to share foods from their native country. The school provides paper goods, serving utensils, decorations, food and prizes for participating families. Arts Partners conducts music and dance during these festivals. Approximately 200-300 families of ELL students, new immigrants and former ELL students participate in this event. About 20 -25 staff members organize and conduct this event. Title III funds are used to pay certified Bilingual or ENL teachers. All other teachers are paid through other school funds. An administrator is also available to supervise, organize and assist during this event. Invitation letters for all parent activities are translated into the dominant languages and sent home with our students. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 52  2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name William T. Sampson Borough Brooklyn School Number 160 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Margaret Russo Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Quiles Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Margaret Hamdan Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Candy Zhou Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 16 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 8 2 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1311 Total number of ELLs Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): 869 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 66.29% K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Mandarin School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) varies K 4 1 3 2 1 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 4 3 0 0 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 8 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In previous years, our school adopted ReadyGen as the literacy program. Although our school modified the ReadyGen units to accommodate the needs of our students. This program has proved challenging for ELL students at various proficiency levels. As a result, this past year we reverted to a balanced literacy program in grades K and l. During the 2017-2018 school year we will be implementing the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project model of the balanced literacy program in grades K-5. This model will continue to provide rigorous instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, while meeting student needs during small group instruction. Student progress will be monitored through data gathered from the use of running records, student writing and performance assessments. Student writing will be analyzed according to rubrics. Data gathered from the above assessments will be used to differentiate instruction. This data will be used to monitor ELL progress 2018-19 CEP 55  as well. Formal assessments such as the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, math and science will also be used to determine ELL progress. In addition, our school implements the Orton Gillingham approach in our word study program. This multisensory approach uses a systematic teaching of phonics that helps meet the needs of our ELL students. Our NYSESLAT data demonstrates a consistent need for progress in speaking. This past school year, our teachers participated in professional development using Paideia Seminars. These are a form of Socratic seminars. It is a process that provides students the opportunity to participate in meaningful structured dialogue and allows students to incorporate vocabulary, discuss text or visuals across content areas and topics. We will continue to incorporate these seminars within our units of study and across content area in order to build the oral language skills necessary. We will continue to use GO MATH as our math program. This program includes both computational and problem solving skills. These involve forming mathematic arguments and explanations as required by the Common Core Learning Standards. Various assessments are incorporated into the program that facilitate differentiation. Math manipulatives and content vocabulary are an integral part of the program. Additionally, some classes will incorporate STEM activities related to the science and math common core learning standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Formal assessments are reviewed at the beginning of the school year to determine student progress. However, ongoing informal assessments and student work is reviewed throughout the school year in order to monitor student growth and provide additional academic intervention services as needed. ENL teachers collaborate with their classroom teachers to plan and meet the needs of our ELL students. ENL teachers are assigned to one grade and if necessary to contiguous grades. This is done to ensure that they have common planning time and ENL teachers participate in professional learning sessions with their grade. Additionally, an ENL teacher serves on a vertical team to provide input and participate in discussions regarding ELL instruction and progress. The EDAT tool will be used to gather data and identify the strengths and areas of needs for our ELL students as well as our Former ELLs. The data will be used to inform instructional decisions, groupings, AIS services as well as afterschool and Saturday programs. Our Pupil Personnel Team meets periodically to discuss student progress. The ELL student's language progress and classroom interventions as well as other pertinent ELL data is used to determine instructional, social or emotional supports our ELLs and Former ELLs may need. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? During the 2016-2017 school year, ongoing informal assessments such as Fountas & Pinnell , NYC Performance tasks and Benchmark assessments were conducted throughout the school year. Baseline, mid year and end of year Fountas & Pinnell assessments were administered to all students including ELLs and Former ELLs. Additionally, performance tasks and unit tests were administered at the end of each unit of study in ReadyGen and was used to evaluate student progress within our curriculum. This data was also used to determine the effectiveness of our current literacy program. The data gathered demonstrated that although the curriculum was adapted to meet the needs of our ELL students, ELL students at the expanding level demonstrated progress, while those students at the entering, emerging and transitioning level struggled continuously to acquire the literacy and language skills needed to meet the demands of the common core learning standards. Similar data was also reflected in the NYC Performance Tasks and Benchmark assessments. During the 2017-2018 school year, TCRWP assessments will be used as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Informal assessments are reviewed throughout the school year in order to monitor student growth and provide additional academic intervention services as needed. This data is reviewed with teachers and administrators.Areas of need are identified and instructional decisions are made to meet the needs of these students. The data will be used to inform instructional decisions, groupings, AIS services as well as afterschool and Saturday programs. Our Response to Intervention Team meets periodically to discuss student progress. The ELL student's language progress and classroom interventions as well as other pertinent ELL data is used to determine instructional, social or emotional supports our ELLs and Former ELLs may need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At P.S. 160 ELL student progress is monitored and tracked by the RTI team. Classroom and support staff members provide differentiated instruction in classrooms using various ENL strategies. These include developing oral language competencies 2018-19 CEP 56  that support content and literacy learning. Vocabulary instruction related to concepts taught in the content area are incorporated into team talks, Paideia seminars and writing. Open-ended questions that promote discussions allow students to practice vocabulary and language structures. Our drama program incorporates the Reader’s Theater program and grammar chants are used to teach vocabulary and sentence structures that allow students to practice fluency, develop phonemic awareness and provide language frames. Visuals, technology and realia are used to facilitate vocabulary and understanding of abstract concepts. Data is collected to identify ELL students who are struggling. All ELL student academic and background information is gathered and discussed at RTI meetings. If students demonstrate a lack of progress, these students are then provided Tier II services based on their area of need. This data includes the student’s educational history, language proficiency levels and progress (NYSESLAT), NYS ELA and Math scores, student work, Fountas & Pinnell reading levels across a period of time, attendance, family history and areas of difficulty based on informal assessments. During the 2017-2018 school year, Teacher's College assesments aligned to the curriculum will be used as well. Screeners are used in Orton Gillingham to identify areas of strengths and needs for ELLs. These assessments are used to determine if the student requires intervention in decoding. Services are provided to those ELL students demonstrating a need in decoding skills. Other academic intervention programs include Reading Recovery in grade one and Early Reading Intervention in the Classroom (ERIC) in grade three. These programs help struggling readers develop early literacy skills. Reading Recovery is conducted in a one to one session over a period of 20 weeks. Formative assessments are conducted at the beginning and end of the program in order to determine progress. Progress of students in the ERIC program and Orton Gillingham and Leveled Literacy Intervention are tracked and revisited over a six-week cycle. AIS Speech and SETSS services are provided if necessary. Math AIS is provided to students in grades 4 and 5 during the school day and additional math intervention is provided during our Saturday programs to students in grades two and three. These ELL students were selected based on data gathered from the NYS Math exam as well as class work, unit assessments and informal assessments. Additional Title III programs help support linguistic skills in all modalities. Only after students are provided several interventions appropriate to their needs across a period of time and continue to demonstrate a lack of progress are they referred for an evaluation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the NYSESLAT and NYSTITELL demonstrates an increase in the number of students demonstrating progress from one on the expanding level across grades in grade 3, 4 and 5, there is no significant difference in the number of there are less students scoring at the intermediate level and an increase in the number of students scoring at the Entering or Expanding level. There is also an increase in the number of ELL students scoring at the Commanding level in grades 3, 4 and 5. This demonstrates student progress as they move through the grades. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data collected from summative, formative and informal assessments are disseminated with staff members during cabinet meetings, professional learning days and vertical team meetings. Both data and input from all stakeholders is used to modify existing programs to meet the needs of the students. For example, during the 2016-2017 school year, a mid year analysis of informal and formative literacy assessments were used to identify a need to develop basic language and literacy skills for a particular group of ELL students who were struggling in grades K and 1. Title III Immigrant programs were created to address this need. Additionally, formative and informal assessments were also used to determine a need in students who entered a school within the United States at the end of grade two or above. Although many of these students had consistent schooling in their native country, but inconsistent schooling within the United States and therefore not identified as SIFE. Our ELL population tends to be transient and very often are born in the United States and move around from country to country or state to state. As a result, there are gaps in the foundational literacy and language skills for these students creating a lack of progress. Data for students during the 2017-2018 school year will be gathered and shared with all staff members. Progress and monitored and programs will continue to be adjusted as needed. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 57  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. During the past few years PS 160K implemented the ReadyGen Reading Program and GO MATH Program in order to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. As previously mentioned, this will change during the 2017-2018 school year. Teachers College Reading and Writing balanced literacy program will be used. for all students including ELLs. All classes at P.S. 160K are heterogeneously grouped. ELL students are placed in the ENL program based on parental choice. During the 2016-2017 school year, a total of 865 ELL students as well as former ELLs within the last two years and ELLS with Exit Criteria were serviced in both an ENL and TBE programs across the grades. After the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT and NYS ELA results are received, students identfied as ELLs or Former ELLs based on new ELL Exit Criteria or at the commanding level on the NYSESLAT for the last two years will receive their mandated number of minutes based on their proficiency level and in accordance with CR PT. 154.2 guidelines. A continuous increase in our ELL population has led to an increase in the number of ENL teachers in order to meet the mandates. ENL teachers are assigned to one grade. This allows the ENL teachers and the classroom teacher to collaborate and plan accordingly for our ELL students. During the 2015-2016 school year, ELLs, Former ELLs based on the reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT test and ELL students who score at the Expanding proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA will receive their mandated minutes as per CR Pt. 154.2. ELL students scoring at the Entering Proficiency Level will receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA services. ELL students at the Emerging Proficiency Level will receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA services and 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL services in ELA. ELL students at the Transitioning Proficiency Level will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL instruction. ELL students scoring at the Expanding Level will receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA services or other content areas. Former ELLs and ELLs reaching proficiency under the new ELL exit criteria will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction in ELA or other content areas. Currently there are sixteen certified ENL teachers servicing ELL students in a Stand-Alone/Integrated ENL program at various language levels. Included in the program are groups ranging from 16-25 ELL students with language proficiency levels ranging from entering to expanding as well as commanding level students or FELLs under the ELL Exit Criteria. These services will be provided to students in grades K-5 as per their Parent Selection/Continuance forms. b. TBE program. If applicable. We will continue to have three Mandarin TBE classes in Kindergarten, two Mandarin TBE classes in grade 1 and one Mandarin TBE class in grade 2. During the 2017-2018 school year a Mandarin TBE K Special Education 12:1:1 class will be added and our current Mandarin TBE 2/3 Special Education 12:1:1 class will become a Mandarin TBE 3/4 Special Education 12:1:1 class. However, during the 2015-2016 school year based on student placement as per IEP, Students will be placed in our special education 12:1:1 class based on their IEP. Parent selection forms will be collected and monitored to track program selections for the 2017-2018 school year. Mandated units of ENL services in the TBE program will be provided by a certified bilingual teacher. Since student placement in a TBE program is based on parental choice, these classes are heterogeneously grouped. As a result, students at the entering level will receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL per week. Emerging level students will receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction, 90 minutes c. DL program. If applicable. Currently we do not have a Dual Language Program. However, we will continue to monitor parental choice based on the parent program selection forms. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 CEP 58  During the 2017-2018 school year, ELLs, Former ELLs who have reached the Commanding proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and ELL students who score at the Expanding proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA will receive ENL instruction as per CR Pt. 154.2. ENL services will be provided by a certified ENL teacher in a push-in model of instruction. ELL students scoring at the Entering Proficiency Level will receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL services. ELL students at the Emerging Proficiency Level will receive 180 minutes of ENL services. ELL students at the Transitioning Proficiency Level will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction and 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL instruction. ELL students scoring at the Expanding Level will receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL services in ELA or other content areas. Former ELLs and ELLs reaching proficiency under the new ELL exit criteria will receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction in ELA or other content areas for up to two years in order to provide support services. Currently there are fourteen certified ESL teachers servicing ELL students in an ENL program at various language levels. Included in the this program are groups ranging from16-25 ELL students with language proficiency levels ranging from entering to expanding in grades K-5 receiving ENL services as per their Parent Selection/Continuance forms. This includes Former ELL students who have reached the Commanding Proficiency Level or scored at the Expanding Level and a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam up to 2 years. Our school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program by monitoring ELL student proficiency levels and ENL/Integrated ENL programming. Programming information is entered in STARS. Home Language Arts support will be provided to students to support language learning. Bilingual resources such as bilingual literature, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries in the content areas and teacher created translated resources. Home language support can be provided through the use of technology. Newcomer students can be assigned a language buddy or bilingual staff members can provide support as they are learning the new language. ELLs and former ELLs will be offered translated versions of the NYS Math or Science exam in the languages available. Qualified translators will be provided as needed if the test is not available in their native language. ELL students in the TBE Program will receive ENL instruction for students at various language levels. entering level students will receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Emerging level students will receive 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction, 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction and 90 minutes of stand-alone ENL instruction in the content area. All ELL students in a TBE program will receive one period of Home Language Arts. Additionally, all students will receive bilingual instruction in math and social studies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our Freestanding ENL program, instruction is provided in English with native language support by a certified ENL teacher. Students are provided background knowledge, vocabulary is taught explicitly with opportunities provided for interaction using the vocabulary. Language structures are scaffolded in order to provide students the opportunity to use the academic language with a purpose. Content language is adapted to meet the needs of individual students at various language levels. Content language is developed through discussion in small groups. Scaffolded instruction is provided to ELL students providing access to core content. Entering level students are provided the opportunity to use non linguistic representations to respond to questions or activities within groups, respond in their native language orally and in writing. OG methodology is used to provide these students with early literacy skills. This language is supported by the use of visuals, technology, realia, hands on activities, graphic organizers. Content area texts are adapted to include supports for ELLs such as additional visuals, glossaries and repetitive complex structures to provide students with multiple opportunities and practice to meet the linguistic demands of the common core. In the TBE program, content knowledge is provided in the home language and English. Students have the opportunity to use their home language as a bridge and transfer that knowledge when learning English. Bilingual texts, teacher created translated materials, visuals, technology, bilingual notes and charts are some of the resources used to support content learning in the TBE classroom. Students are provided opportunities to share their ideas and participate in discussions in their native language. As the student's English proficiency level increases the use of the home language during instruction decreases based on the language proficiency levels of the students. Small group instruction will be provided to our ELL students using the balanced literacy model in order to meet their particular needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 59  ELL students can respond in their home language through writing and orally. Bilingual staff members assist in translation of written language and oral translations whenever possible. SIFE students are administered an oral language questionnaire and the Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer SIFE (MLS). Translated versions of NYS exams provide the opportunity for students to demonstrate their progress in their home language. Translation/translator of content exams are provided wherever available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students: Currently, there is one SIFE student in our school. However, we have a transient population that moves from school to school within the United States. While it is not interrupted schooling, it is inconsistent. The lack of consistency particularly for ELLs creates gaps in learning. Therefore, ELL students identified as SIFE will receive academic intervention services (AIS) to provide students with the foundational language and literacy skills they need to show progress. Students are invited to attend Title III programs for entering and emerging students that provide the opportunity to work collaboratively in a small groups and address their language and literacy needs. A translation PAL is assigned to these students in their classroom to help them navigate the school environment and classroom routines. Peer tutoring is provided by students during lunch periods. Materials and resources such as content area text on the same unit topics at various reading levels are used to provide these students the opportunity to engage in content area text at their reading level. Other programs offered to these students include AIS Literacy Intervention, Math, Speech, Orton Gillingham and At- Risk SETSS. Additionally, Orton Gillingham methodologies are used to improve their reading and vocabulary skills. Instruction is conducted in English with home language support. Newcomers One of P.S. 160’s goals is to provide the students with an opportunity to acquire English language proficiency in a supportive and nurturing environment. Students are assigned a language buddy to help transition. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers providing materials such as adapted text, visual aides, picture glossaries for unit vocabulary, graphic organizers to meet the needs of newcomers at various language levels and sentence frames that can be used during small group discussions. The Integrated teaching and Stand Alone model allows the classroom and the ENL teacher to collaborate and differentiate instruction for these students. Newcomers are grouped homogeneously during afterschool and Saturday programs in order to meet their needs. ENL strategies in all four modalities are integrated to facilitate language learning. These programs offer newcomer students an environment that decreases affective filter and allows them to develop foundational language and literacy skills. Since ELL students are still required to be administered the New York State English Language Arts test (ELA) to ELLs after one year in an English Language School System as well as the New York State Math and Science test. These students are invited to participate in the various Afterschool and Saturday School programs. Title III Programs will be created to address the needs of ELLs at various proficiency levels. ELL data such as NYSESLAT scores, informal assessments and NYS Exam results will be used to provide targeted instruction and focus on developing literacy, oral language and content-area vocabulary skills. These programs provide ELLs instructional support in order to build independence, self-confidence and sense of ownership of their education. Developing ELLs/Long Term ELLs These students receive scaffolded instruction using ENL strategies in small groups. Differentiation is provided based on student needs. In some cases, these students struggle with reading and understanding more complex text and vocabulary. Scaffolded lessons included in the ReadyGen program are modified to meet the needs of these students. Comprehension instruction is scaffolded through the use of graphic organizers, vocabulary organizers, visuals and videos. Recorded text allow students ot develop listening and reading comprehension skills. These strategies help build background knowledge in order to increase order comprehension. Discussions are developed through open ended questions using Bloom’s Taxonomy in order to foster in depth conversations. Sentence frames and discussion starters are used to provide students the language necessary to participate in these discussions. Longer text is chunked during small group instruction in order to make complex text more comprehensible. The language demands of more complex text is challenging for ELLs. Explicit teaching of vocabulary using consistent routines with support when reading and understanding words and creating oral and written tasks that require the 2018-19 CEP 60  application of the vocabulary. ELL students receiving services 4-6 years and former ELLs are included in all additional instructional and enrichment programs. The instructional programs available to them include Literacy Plus, Title III ESL Afterschool Program, Math Enrichment Morning Program, Saturday Math Academic Intervention Service program will be offered to students in grades 3, 4 and 5. AIS math will be provided to students in grades 4 and 5 during the school day. Data from the NYS Math, NYS ELA, NYSESLAT results as well as informal assessments will be used to determine which students are invited to these programs. These students receive additional instruction to help them understand the academic vocabulary and language demands necessary to solve mathematical problems and provide explanations and mathematical arguments. This is challenging for our population as many times they can demonstrate the computational skills, but struggle with the expressive language necessary for mathematical explanations. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are made available to those students that can read in their native language. Intervention services such as Orton Gillingham, Reading Recovery (grade 1), AIS reading and SETSS are provided to ELLs and former ELLs based on their needs. Enrichment programs will also be offered to these students. Our school diversity is celebrated through various programs in our school. One of these programs is called the Global Partners Junior Program. Students in grade 5 participate in this program which allows our students to connect with international peers via the internet and develop technology skills. Students communicate and learn via skype with an international community and collaborate on projects. The program includes visits the the United Nations and culminates with a project that is shared with other students who have participated in this program throughout New York City. Currently, we do not have long term ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In the past three years, our ELL-SWDs population has increased. Several Special Education 12:1:1 and ICT classes have been formed including a K/! Special Education 12:1:1 TBE Mandarin class. ELL’s with Special Needs ELL students with special needs continue to receive ENL Instruction in a Push In model. Response to Intervention (RTI) team monitors student progress across all grades. Some ELL students with special needs are mainstreamed during reading, writing and math. This decision is made on an individual basis. Students are then referred for participation to one of several safety net programs existing at P.S. 160. These programs include AIS Reading, AIS Math, Reading Recovery, Wilson Language and At Risk Resource Room. Early Reading Intervention in Classrooms (ERIC), a program specially designed for students in grade one who have demonstrated a need in basic literacy skills includes ELLs with special needs. In addition, Orton Gillingham methodology is used for ELLs with disabilities demonstrating a need in decoding skills. Ongoing professional development using this teaching method is provided for all staff members. This systematic approach using multisensory techniques to teach phonics, reading and spelling skills support students with disabilities. Graphic organizers and story boarding techniques provide these students with the structure necessary to organize and develop their ideas in writing. These students are also availed the opportunity to participate in afterschool, Saturday Programs and enrichment programs. Behavior plans are in place for students based on their needs. Multisensory methods are used in classroom to improve the performance of ELLs with special needs. Various writing tools are used to assist students with special needs. These include pencil grips, thick pencils and crayons, E-Z strips are used to help students keep track of their reading. Content area exams are read to students based on their IEP during all class assessments. Adaptations to the ReadyGen program are made during instruction are provided to meet the needs of this subgroup. Building early literacy skills and scaffolding lessons in comprehension provide students with strategies and tools they can use to build independence. Materials and resources such as Windows to Literacy and Benchmark Early Explorers are used during small group instruction as well. Guided reading materials at the instructional level related to the same topics included in the ReadyGen curriculumiELL’s with Special Needs. Smartboard activities, Smartech exchange lessons and Internet4classrooms engage students in activities to provide support by making content accessible. The technology allows students with visual, auditory, kinesthetic and opportunities for social and academic interactions. 2018-19 CEP 61  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All classes at P.S. 160 implement Common Core curriculum including ELL-SWD students. Teachers College literacy program and Go Math are common core aligned literacy and math programs. ENL teachers and classroom teachers will collaborate to scaffold lessons and make complex text comprehensible for these students. Supports appropriate to the students language proficiency level and their cognitive needs will be provided. Student information and progress will be shared with ELL teachers as well as special education teachers and support staff in order to better serve this population. Additionally, texts at the students instructional level will be used to build literacy and language skills. Orton Gillingham methodologies are used to help students meet the IEP goals for students who have difficulty learning to read. This multisensory approach provides a systematic approach to develop foundational reading skills. Ongoing progress monitoring is part of the decision making to decide what areas the student can be mainstreamed. Flexible scheduling for ELL-SWD students is created for students in literacy, math and ENL. Tailored schedules will be created for ELLs -SWDs who demonstrate continuous progress.. ELL students in a 12:1:1 program will be integrated with students in a less restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our population at P.S. 160 is comprised of approximately 66% of ELLs. Therefore, ELL students are afforded the opportunity to participate in all programs throughout the school. Literacy Plus and Title III ESL Afterschool and Morning programs are offered to ELL students in grades 3-5. Saturday Math and Literacy AIS programs AIS Program Saturday Math Academic Intervention Service program is offered to students in grades 3, 4 and 5. AIS. AIS math is also provided to students in grades 4 and 5 during the school day. Data from the NYS Math results as wll as informal assessments are used to determine which students are invited to these programs. These students receive additional instruction to help students understand the academic vocabulary and language demands necessary to solve mathematical problems and provide explanations and mathematical arguments. This is challenging for our population as many times they can demonstrate the computational skills, but struggle with explaining how they arrived at their response. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are made available to those students that can read in their native language. A Title III ESL Morning Program has been created to address the needs of ELLs in all proficiency levels. This program was designed based on data gathered for ELL students on all four modalities of the NYSESLAT, ELA results and informal assessments. ELLs in this grade demonstrate a need to provide additional support outside the regular school day to focus on developing literacy, oral language and content-area vocabulary. Beginner ELL students in grades 3-5 will receive this instruction. Students will receive support connected to the Teacher's College balanced literacy curriculum. ELLs also receive additional support in this program. This was done to meet the specific needs of ELLs based on language proficiency levels. Expanding level students will participate in the program three times a week during winter and spring sessions as well. Other AIS programs available to ELL students include Reading Recovery (grade one). This is a program that builds early literacy skills. Students are served in this program for twenty weeks on a one to one basis. Grade one students also receive services in the Early Reading Intervention in the Classroom (ERIC) program. Small group instruction is provided ot studnets in need of foundational literacy skills. Students are placed based on their language proficiency and reading level. Orton Gillingham services are provided to ELL students in need of decoding skills. AIS Speech, AIS SETSS and extended day programs are provided to ELL students based on their needs. Enrichment programs are offered to ELLs as well. These include Greek Mythology Club, Art Club, Drama Club, Chinese Dance Club, Multicultural Club, Global Partners Program, Technology Club, Robotics Club, Coding Club, Tennis Club and Chess Club. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As previously mentioned our school will implement Teacher's College Readers and Wriers Project curriculum. Professional development will be provided to all staff members including ENL and bilingual teachers. Paideia seminars will be continue to be integrated into our new curriculum to support oral language skills. Additionally, we will implement the RULERS program to address the growing social and emotional needs of our ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 62  At this time there we are adding a TBE Mandarin Special Education 12;1:1 class and are not closing any bilingual classes. Parent selection and continuance forms will continue to be collected and tracked throughout the school year. If adjustments are necessary, the proper procedures and protocols for bilingual program under CR Pt. 154.2 will be followed. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our population at P.S. 160 is comprised of approximately 66% of ELLs and 12% Former ELLs. Therefore, all ELLs and Former ELL students are afforded the opportunity to participate in all programs throughout the school. All programs are conduc in English. There are several AIS programs that provide support in reading and writing. The crtieria for determining eligibility for these services include end of year data from state assessments including NYS ELA and NYSESLAT, teacher recommendation based on formative assessments and classroom observations. In grade one Reading Recovery provides academic intervention to build early literacy skills. Students are serviced in this program on a one to one basis. Early Reading Intervention in the Classroom (ERIC) This program provides support to students in small groups in need of basic literacy skills. Orton Gillingham is a multisensory approach using auditory, visual and kinesthetic techniques to develop early reading skills such as decoding and the structure of the English language. Instruction is provided in small groups. Leveled Literacy Intervention is a program that provides additional support inreading, writing and word study. Services are provided in a small group. At- Risk SETSS services are provided to students in grades K-5 struggling in all areas of literacy as well as other content areas. AIS Speech is provided to students in grades K-5 based on their particular needs. Other AIS reading programs are provided to students in grades 3-5 during the day to develop comprehension and vocabulary skills. Enrichment programs such as Arts Connection provide students in kindergarten and grade one the opportunity to develop language skills through music. Literacy Plus is an afterschool program for students in grades 3-5 to provide additional support in reading and writing. Title III ESL afterschool programs target ELL students in grades 3-5. Students are grouped according to language proficiency levels. The program provides support in all four modalities to strengthen language and literacy skills. Saturday Literacy programs offer support to students in need of strenghtening literacy skills. Our Title III Saturday school program provides additional support for students in grade two. Students are grouped according to language proficiency levels. Title III Morning Program provides additional support to students at various language levels. Students in this program are placed according to their NYSESLAT test results. An analysis of each subtest is used to determine the areas of need. Additional literacy and language support is provided in small groups. Criteria for determining AIS services in math include beginning and end of year data from NYS Math results, unit assessments and classwork , teacher recommendation and classroom observations. AIS Math is provided to students in grades four and five targeting students who obtain a level 1 or 2 on the NYS Math exam. Instruction is provided in a small group during the day. Math plus is an afterschool program that provides support in developing math computational skills as well as problem solving skills. Both programs provide additional support to help students understand the academic and content vocabulary. Vocabulary and mathematical structures are provided to students in order to meet the language demands necessary to solve mathematical problems, provide explanations and mathematical arguments. This is a challenge for our ELL population. Our students do well with computational skills, but struggle to provide an explanation for how they solve word problems. Bilingual glossaries, dictionaries and where possible assessments are made available in the native language. The Math Enrichment program is offered to students in grades 3-5. This program provides opportunities for students to expand their knowledge and apply mathematic reasoning strategies to solve complex math problems. Other afterschool enrichment programs are offered to ELLs as well. Some of these clubs include Greek Mythology Club, Italian Club, Multicultural Club, Robotics Club, Coding Club, Board Games Club (improve socialization skills) Chinese Dance Club, Technology Club, and Student Council. Our Girls running club allows students to set goal and promotes healthy habits culminating with a 5k race. ELLs in grades 2-5 are invited to participate in the Chess in the Schools Program. Our Chess Club participates in competitions throughout the city and nationals. Students in grade 2 and 3 participate in the Chess in the Schools program during the day to promote critical thinking and problem solving strategies as well as improve social skills. Our Chess team won first place during the 2017 US Chess Federation Nationals Elementary Championship under 900 section in Nashville, Tennessee. Our arts program that fosters creativity through the visual arts as well as music and drama with a language component to enhance vocabulary and expressive language. Students learned drawing, painting techniques culminating with students sharing their art work and writing or oral presentation with their peers. ELL students were also part of our Broadway Arts Partners program At P.S. 160 we believe in developing the child as a whole. Providing students the opportunity to participate in programs that allow them to explore their strengths. Two ELL students won the PS Art Contest and was selected to have her art work displayed at 2018-19 CEP 63  the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the jumbo screen in Times Square, New York. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 160 will implement the Teachers College balanced literacy program that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Materials and resources from this program are used for all students including ELLs. However, in order to meet the needs of ELL students at various language proficiency levels, other resources are used to support ELLs. Visuals, bilingual picture vocabulary cards, magnetic letters, sight words materials, manipulatives and realia are used to increase vocabulary and develop phonics skills. Other materials are used during small group instruction including National Geographic Windows to Literacy, Benchmark Early Explorers and Rigby On Our Way to English. Texts at various reading levels related to the units will be used to meet the needs of our students. Technology tools such as Smartboards, document cameras and I-PADs are used to ensure instruction is interactive. Websites such as Starfall and Brain Pop ESL are used to allow ELL students to practice literacy and language skills. Multimedia programs such as Raz Kids and MY ON allows students to listen and read fiction and informational texts at various reading levels. Students complete comprehension activities at the end of each text and teachers can monitor student progress. Imagine Learning will be used as additional support and a way to provide our ELL students with extra practice in all four modalities. Mindplay is a virtual reading technology program for struggling readers. It includes an online assessment that creates an individual plan. The program components include phonics, phonemic awareness, vocabulary, comprehension and fluency, grammar and structure. Teachers can monitor student progress as well. The Move to Improve program will incorporate research based activities that require movement as a way to review content. Bilingual fiction and nonfiction texts are made accessible for students that can read in their native language. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are made available to ELLs. Video clips are used to build vocabulary and background knowledge in the content areas. Test prep materials are also used to prepare ELL students for state exams. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language is supported in both the TBE classrooms and the ENL in several ways. Some of these include pairing students with a language buddy, labeling classrooms in both the home language and English. Students are provided the opportunity to respond in the home language when speaking or writing to facilitate language tranference. Classroom libraries include bilingual materials such as bilingual text, charts, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries or teacher created translated materials. In the TBE classroom, students sing songs and chants in their home language, teachers create translated materials so that students have the opportunity to attain conceptual knowledge that facilitates vocabulary and comprehension skills in English. ELLs in a TBE program receive one period of home language arts instruction. ELLs in a TBE program also receive instruction in their home language in two content subject areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support ELL students so that they may achieve success in both literacy and math on their grade. The challenges faced by ELLs in all areas require support that is consistent, addresses their needs and is scaffolded appropiately to meet the language demands necessary to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. Rigorous instruction will be maintained through the Teachers College program. Support materials and resources appropriate for the grade will be provided. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 160 will implement the Teachers COllege balnaced literacy program that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Materials and resources from this program are used for all students including ELLs. However, in order to meet the needs of ELL students at various language proficiency levels, other resources are used to support ELLs. Visuals, bilingual picture vocabulary cards, magnetic letters, sight words materials, manipulatives and realia are used to increase vocabulary and develop phonics skills. Other materials are used during small group instruction including National Geographic Windows to Literacy, Benchmark Early Explorers and Rigby On Our Way to English. Texts at various reading levels related to the ReadyGen topics are used to meet the needs of our students. Technology tools such as Smartboards, document cameras and I-PADs are used to ensure instruction is interactive. Websites such as Starfall and Brain Pop ESL are used to allow ELL students to practice literacy and language skills. Multimedia programs such as Raz Kids and MY ON allows students to listen and read fiction and 2018-19 CEP 64  informational texts at various reading levels. Students complete comprehension activities at the end of each text and teachers can monitor student progress. Mindplay is a virtual reading technology program for struggling readers. It includes an online assessment that creates an individual plan. The program components include phonics, phonemic awareness, vocabulary, comprehension and fluency, grammar and structure. Teachers can monitor student progress as well. Students in grade 4 use the Smart Science technology program. This program provides students the opportunity to review standard based science topics. Vocabulary and content material are presented using videos and visuals. Students hyothesize and view experiments through their program. Students are able to work at their own pace and teachers can monitor student progress. Bilingual fiction and nonfiction texts are made accessible for students that can read in their native language. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are made available to ELLs. Video clips are used to build vocabulary and background knowledge in the content areas. Test prep materials are also used to prepare ELL students for state exams. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently, there are no specific programs made available before the beginning of the school year. However, students new to the school are assigned a buddy in the classroom to help them acclamate to their new environment. Often these students are also their language partner. They translate for newcomer students on a daily basis. Our bilingual school counselor and parent coordinator serve as a bridge between the home and school by communicating with parents and students to provide support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school does not offer language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at this time. Parent selection forms will be collected and records maintained to track parent program selection. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Approximately 66% of students at P.S. 160K were identified as ELLs during the 2016-2017 school year. The push-in model of instruction is intended to support all ELL students. Common planning time will be afforded to ENL teachers and their collaborative partners. Demographic and enrollment data indicates that our ELL population continues to grow. Therefore, additional professional development will be necessary for all staff members as they are all teachers of ELLs.in accordance with guideslines in CR. PT 154.2 ENL teachers and their collaborative partners will meet to plan for instruction and incorporate ESL methodology and strategies into our current literacy and content area programs. Analysis of data to drive instruction is conducted during scheduled professional learning community days and designated professional development days. This includes looking at sample student work, informal and formal assessments. Professional Development for all classroom teachers on the NYSESLAT will also be conducted by ESL staff members. All staff members are provided the opportunity to participate in professional development workshops or conferences provided by the NYC Department of Education including the Office of ELLs throughout the school year. Teachers will also have the opportunity to attend professional conferences held 2018-19 CEP 65  outside of New York City Department of Education. Including NYSABE and TESOL conferences. Turnkey training will be provided at the school level by staff members attending these sessions to all other staff members. Professional Development Calendar 2015-2016/2016-2017 September Teachers College October Teachers College: Adapting Curriculum for ELLs. Planning and collaborating between classroom teachers and ENL teachers November Monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLC) days - Monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLC) days -Incorporating ENL strategies curriculum Planning and collaborating between classroom teachers and ENL teachers Department of ELL Conference-Election Day December Monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLC) days-Incorporating ENL strategies in the curriculum curriculum planning and collaborating between classroom and ENL teachers, Paideia Professional development January Monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLC) days –Incorporating ENL strategies in the curriculum curriculum/Planning and collaborating between classroom teacher and ENL teachers Orton Gillingham Professional development February Monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLC) days –Incorporating ENL strategies in the curriculum curriculum/Planning and collaborating between classroom teachers and ENL teachers March Monthly Professional Learning Communities (PLC) days –Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school guidance counselors along with our parent coordinator provides staff, students and parents information to help students transition ot middle school. They conduct informational sessions on the application process and the required paperwork. Translators are available during these meetings. Parents are sent information regarding middle school open school sessions so that they may make the decision for their child. The guidance counselors meet with each fifth grade class to help prepare students for middle school. Guidance counselors are provided professional development in order to assist parents with this process. All staff members are provided the opportunity to participate in professional development workshops or conferences provided by the NYC Department of Education including the Office of ELLs throughout the school year. Teachers will also have the opportunity to attend professional conferences held outside of New York City Department of Education. Including NYSABE and TESOL conferences. Turnkey training will be provided at the school level by staff members attending these sessions to all other staff members. Documentation of staff development sessions for ELLs conducted within our school is maintained through sign in sheets and professional development agendas. Staff development sessions through outside conferences or meetings are documented on a conference log in the main office. These logs are kept on file from year to year and will be used to track the required professional development hours as per CR. Pt. 154.2. All teachers will complete 15% of the professional development hours required under CR Part 80 in the related to language acquisition in alignment with content area instruction, co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content for ELLs. ENL and bilingual teachers will complete a minimum of 50% in these areas as well. Secretaries are provided opportunities to attend professional development regarding the ELL identification process. 2018-19 CEP 66  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the parent orientation meetings and citywide parent teacher conferences, ENL teachers and Bilingual teachers will hold annual individual meetings with the parents of their students to discuss the goals of the program, student progress, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results and their individual needs. These meetings will be scheduled to accommodate both the parents and ENL/Bilingual teacher's schedule. Arrangements for translators to be made available during these meetings will be made ahead of time. Translators from the translation unit will be used whenever necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement is an essential component to the education of all children particularly for ELLs. The major languages of spoken by our parents other than English at P.S. 160K include, but are not limited to, Mandarin, Cantonese, Fukinese, Spanish, Urdu, Albanian, Arabic, Polish, Russian, Bengali, Gujarati, Ukrainian, Vietnamese, Hindi, Uzbek, Filipino and Hungarian. The various cultures represented in the school are visible within the surrounding community as evidenced by local businesses, houses of worship, newspapers, and community based organizations. Chinese and Spanish are the dominant languages. The full time Parent Coordinator, who speaks several Chinese dialects in addition to Cantonese and Mandarin, serves as a bridge between the home and school community. She provides a great deal of support to parents of all students in particular English Language Learners. Bilingual teachers, support staff and bilingual parents provide support to parents and students of other languages. outreach is ongoing throughout the school year. Notices and letters are translated in order to keep parents informed of school activities and events. Parents are invited to attend ongoing orientation sessions throughout the school year. This includes the Parent Curriculum meetings conducted by each grade at the beginning of the school year and the Parent Orientation meeting informing parents of the ELL program choice available for their children. Monthly Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings are held. Translators and translation units are provided during such meetings. In an effort to increase attendance during PTA meetings, student performances and Citizen of the Month are conducted during these meetings. In addition, ELL parents are informed of school events and educational programs via the School Leadership Team. This team is comprised of administrators, parents and teachers who work collaboratively to make decisions and inform their constituents of the programs within the school. At these meetings, the Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) is reviewed and opportunities for parents to contribute their ideas. Parents are also encouraged to participate in the following activities: Parent Computer classes, Literacy Workshops, Spring Arts Festival, Fall and Spring Multicultural Festivals, Family Movie Night, Math Night, Chess Night, and Recognition Breakfasts for Caretakers of our students. Parents are also invited to participate in our weekend program called Parents as Arts Partners where culturally diverse arts workshops are provided. These activities provide our students along with their family members a chance to participate in fun filled activities. Ongoing Curriculum Workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards in Math and Literacy will be offered to parents throughout the school year so that they maybe informed of the various programs and method of instruction. These workshops also provide parents with information regarding city and state assessments. Saturday Title III Parent ESL classes are offered to parents of ELLs throughout the school year. Child care is provided to facilitate parent attendance. These classes serve as a forum for families to voice their opinions, concerns and suggestions to our principal. Ongoing ESL Parent Program Orientation Sessions will be offered to inform parents of newcomer students throughout the year of the various English learning programs available citywide. Parent meetings are held by our school guidance counselors and Parent Coordinator to provide information regarding the middle school application process. An ESL Curriculum Workshop will be offered to parents of ELL students in order to provide them with strategies that will assist their children in acquiring the language. Parenting workshops are also provided to parents of newly arrived students. These workshops are designed to address social and behavioral issues arising from students raised by other family members in their native country who then meet their parents for the first time after a few years. Workshops on Bullying and Cyber-Bullying, Homework Tips, How to Help Your Child at Home, Parent Coping Skills, Positive DIscipline and Early Childhood Speech Development are some of the topics covered throughout the school year. Opportunities for parents and their children to engage in meaningful activities as a family are provided through family trips. These trips allow all students, particularly ELLs to develop language skills and engage in activities along with their family. Such events include a trip to the Botanical Garden, where students and family members engage in a scavenger hunt or the Museum of Natural History. Not only do these provide opportunities for the family to be together, but it also provides opportunities for 2018-19 CEP 67  learning as they involve content area subject matter. These trips are conducted in the spring. In response to requests, more opportunities for parents to become active participants in their child’s classroom monthly classrooms activities for parents have been scheduled across the grades. These include parents participating in Family Reading Day, coming in during the writing workshop and creating stories together with their child, publishing parties and participating in Science experiments with the students. Participating in our Arts Connection program for grades K and 1. Other activities include students completing writing genres such as a Narrative Procedure and then making or doing those procedures they wrote about with their parents (making a gingerbread house, playing a game, following directions to make origami shapes). These experiences create memorable moments in which the students are learning and sharing what they have learned with their parents who very often work long hours. These activities create a sense of pride and motivate students, particularly ELLs. Our school has established a parent lending library that includes bilingual literature. This allows parents to conveniently borrow books to read with their child on a daily basis. It encourages literacy skills and language development. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Parent Workshops 10-6-17 Positive Parenting Auditorium Bilingual School Social Worker and Guidance Counselors 10-13-17 English as a New Language (ENL) Curriculum and the Bilingual Common Core Standards Formally known as English as a Second Language (ESL) 10-20-17 Homework & Test Taking Strategies 11-10-17 Your Special Needs Child 11-17-17 Getting your Child Ready for Middle School Annex Cafeteria Guidance Dept. 11-24-17 How to Help Your Child at Home (Specific Reading Strategies) 12-1-17 Fun Science: Activities & Experiments 12-15-17 Navigating Our Website- Staying in Contact with Your Child’s Teacher 12-22-17 Winter Celebration 1-12-18 Dental Health 1-19-18 Being Healthy 1-26-18 How to Use the Web for Educational Purposes 2-2-18 Common Core- Math 2-9-18 Common Core- Literacy 2-23-18 Staying Fit 3-1-18 Academic Intervention 3-15-18 How to Facilitate Language 6-21-18 Summer Safety Annex Cafeteria Ms. Monte 2018-19 CEP 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Margaret Russo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K160 School Name: 160 Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mary Chu Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Information regarding parent language preferences for both written and oral communication is gathered from ATS reports such as RCPL, Home Language Survey Forms, Student emergency contact cards, our parent coordinator and parent meetings.This information is provided to all teachers so to facilitate home-school communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 71  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1, 227 92% 1227 92% The following are the languages representative of our school population. However, since we have a transient population, these languages may change. Currently these languages spoken are various Chinese dialects including Mandarin, Fukinese, Fujianese, Toishanese, Cantonese, Spanish Polish, Hungarian, English, Arabic, Russian, Bengali Urdu, and Uzbek. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families The following are some of the documents our school disseminates every year that require translation: Parent Handbooks, PTA meetings notification, Middle School Application information, notification of special events and performances, notification of parent involvement activities, curriculum overviews, notification of ELL parent orientation meetings, notification of ELL curriculum meetings, Kindergarten information packets for incoming students, supply lists, notifications of afterschool, Saturday and morning programs, afterschool enrichment programs, registration information, behavior plans, notification of IEP and EPC and conferences, LPT meetings and other workshops, promotional letters, NYS assessment calendars and assessment information, summer school letters and notification of parent teacher conferences. These are Kindergarten information packets are sent to parents mid August. Parent Handbooks are sent out in September. Middle School application information usually begins in October and is ongoing as plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At PS 160 we are fortunate to have bilingual staff members that speak and write in various languages. Written translations are conducted by bilingual staff 2018-19 CEP 72  some of the documents.Other important documents are translated as needed. members within the school building. A translation folder is made available in the main office to all staff members so that they can request translations with a specified due date. Translations are conducted before and afterschool to accommodate these requests. Requests for translations can also be emailed to those bilingual staff members as well. additional information is needed. Curriculum meetings are conducted in September. ELL curriculum meetings are conducted in the Fall Translated written notifications and oral translations are conducted throughout the school year for special events and performances, ELL parent orientation meetings, information regarding Afterschool and Saturday programs, registration information, IEP and EPC meetings, assessment information, ELL individual parent conferences. Any other pertinent communication will be disseminated as needed throughout the school year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 73  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Oral translations are provided during registration, ELL intake process, parent curriculum meetings, Parent Teacher Association meetings, parent teacher, conferences, parent workshops, individual parent meetings, Conferences related to Special Education services such as IEP meetings and EPC and conferences. LPT meetings will be conducted with translators as needed. Translators are also provided to disseminate important information regarding middle school applications and gifted and talented testing. All translation services are provided by staff, community members, translation unit and outside contracted translation services. Outside contracted translation services are provided to ELLs on content area NYS assessments as needed. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? At PS 160 we are fortunate to have bilingual staff members that speak and write in various languages. Staff members are aware of who the bilingual staff members are in our building. Written or oral requests can be made in advance to those staff members for translation. An annual calendar of parent workshops and PTA meetings are made available so that translators can be secured ahead of time. Translators are made available during the parent meeting times on Tuesdays. Translation A kindergarten parent orientation is conducted at the beginning of the school year. Middle School application information sessions usually begins in October and is ongoing as additional information regarding open houses, middle school application process and the appeal process is needed. Individual meetings are Curriculum meetings are conducted in September. ELL curriculum meetings are conducted in the Fall. ELL Parent Orientation meetings are conducted as needed. Individual parent meetings are conducted throughout the school year. are conducted throughout the school year for special events and performances, information regarding. Monthly PTA meetings are conducted 2018-19 CEP 74  throughout the school year. IEP, EPC and LPT meetings are conducted as needed. units and transmitters are used during parent meetings and workshops. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. During an emergency a robotic telephone system has been set up to contact parents during an emergency. Additionally a group email messaging system has been set up as an alternative parents are also reached via email in case of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. This information is disseminated to staff during meetings and is included in our teacher handbook. Information from the RCPL report is disseminated to staff members so they are aware of the languages spoken by the parents of the students in their classrooms. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At P.S. 160 the Parents Bill of Rights are posted by the main entrance in various languages. Language signs are place by the main entrance. Parents Guide to Language Access and the Language ID Guide are located by the security desk and the main office. Translation unit headphones are used at during PTA and other curriculum meetings. Our Parent Coordinator is made available to translate as parents enter the building. Trained staff members also assist parents when translation is needed. Information regarding school events, student performance and behavior are translated accordingly. Additionally, translators are made available during registration and parent conferences for students receiving special education services and ELL services. All communication related to academic support services including afterschool and enrichment programs are translated as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 75  NYCDOE parent surveys as well as in-house school surveys and our feedback provided by parents to our Parent Coordinator are used to identify needs are used to monitor the translation needs of our parents. 2018-19 CEP 76 
