2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K162 School Name: J.H.S. 162 THE WILLOUGHBY Principal: AMANDA LAZERSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information I.S. 162- The Willoughby School 333200010162 6-7-8 School Number (DBN): 32K162 1390 Willoughby Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11237 (718) 821-4860 Phone Number: (718)821-1738 Fax: Amanda Lazerson alazerson@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Amanda Lazerson Wanda Baez Joanna SinghFuentes Jessica Mazzarelli SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Joanna SinghFuentes N/A N/A District Information CSD32 Sheila Gorski Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Ave. Brooklyn NY 11221 sgorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)574-1100 Phone Number: (718)574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North FSC Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  131 Livingston Street Room 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Amanda Lazerson Wanda Baez Joanna Fuentes Singh Anna Bambina Jessica Mazzarelli VictoriaRosario Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elvira Becerril ArileydaDuran Aida Berrezueta YeceniaSamayoa Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of IS 162 ensures all students have equitable access to high-quality coursework that meets their unique learning needs. The core of student learning uses an advanced literacy approach to prepare our students for academic success. This collaborative, student-centered approach affords our students with rigorous and relevant content allowing our students to become productive and contributing members of the 21st century. 2018-19 CEP 9  Vision Statement: To create a well-rounded learning environment that meets the academic, non-academic and social emotional needs of all students, to provide multiple opportunities that motivate, encourage and prepare all our students for college and career readiness in an increasingly complex and technological society. We are “Teaching the Will-to-Be Excellent” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. I.S. 162 is a middle school located in the primarily low income area of Bushwick, Brooklyn. Down from a register of almost a thousand students ten years ago, IS 162 now serves about 320 sixth through eighth grade students. The area that surrounds the school is undergoing a change in demographics, seeing an influx of young, single artists and other professionals. This change accompanied by the growth of charter schools in the area is responsible for our lower register. Our students are 88% Hispanic, 8% African American, with the remainder being Asian, Caucasian and other ethnicity's. Context : IS 162 is situated in Bushwick, Brooklyn with a population of 320 students. Of our student population 26.5% of our students receive special education services and 16% of our students are English Language Learners. Strategic Collaborations: -MSQI – Middle School Quality Initiative -YALE University- Center for Emotional Intelligence -Algebra for All -SHSAT Day School Program -Center for the Arts Education -Creative Connections -CITE - Urban Advantage -Teen Thursdays/Morgan Library -Art Matters -RiseBoro - Ridgewood/Bushwick Community Center -DOT -STEM Pilot -Codesters.com -Safe Public Spaces -St. John’s University -Cooperative Healthy Active Motivate Positive Students (C.H.A.M.P.S.) - New York Islanders -School Mental Health -H2O for Life Extracurricular Activities and Clubs: Empire Afterschool Grant Robotics, Coding, Cooking, Culture, Breakfast (HW help), Leadership, Fashion, Chorus, Science, DIY, and Gardening Club, Gender & Sexualiy Alliance, English Language Learners, Future Goals - NHL, Theater 2018-19 CEP 10  Special Programs: Student of the Month, College and Career week, Visual Arts, Computer Graphics, Monthly Family Engagement Activities, Quarterly Awards Recognition, College Day, Musical Production, Autism Awareness, Respect for All STEM Programs: Ocearch-Shark Tracking STEM Pilot-Flight Simulation Coding-Codesters.com Sports Programs: CHAMPS Sports Sports & Arts - NY Edge 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The majority of the students are 2 to 3 levels below grade level in both math and ela. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Growth: On our most recent Quality Review Report 2017-2018, IS 162 received a rating of Well-Developed in: 1.4 Positive Learning Environment 3.4 High Expectations 1.3 Leveraging Resources 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development Proficient in: 1.1 Curriculum 1.2 Pedagogy 2.2 Assessment 3.1 Goals and Action Plans 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Systems 2018-19 CEP 11  Over the course of the school year our teachers have participated in intensive professional development to enhance their practice to increase the level of rigor in each classroom. Teachers have and will continue to engage in collaborative inquiry work during their “Teacher Team Tuesdays” time. Parental involvement has increased in the school in the past year; this is due to the Monthly Family Engagement Activities. Some of the activities include, Dads Bring Your Kid to School day, Our “Family” Thanksgiving, Holiday Ornament Making, Family Paint Night, Literacy Night and Bingo Night. Additionally, each month we recognize our 6 students of the month and their families with a breakfast. We hold 4 award nights over the course of the year where students and staff are presented with awards for academic achievement, improvement, service, and attendance. Focus: During the 2018-2019 school year we will work to strengthen our teacher teams in an effort to strengthen our assessment and planning. Collaborative Planning Opportunity time is embedded into the school day to allow teachers to engage in collaborative team planning by establishing a school wide approach to rigorous student learning through consistent instructional adjustments, based on an inquiry approach and using a range of summative and formative assessments. Additionally, a key area of focus for this school year are to continue our work in developing rigorous and coherent curricula and assessments that are appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards for all students and to better modify them for identified subgroups in order to maximize teacher instructional practices and student learning outcomes. We are working to apply scaffolds for all subgroups with pre and post assessments to assure student progress. We are also working to strengthen the home school partnership by planning more parent meetings, Parent Learning Walks, expanding our Saturday ELL program to include English Language Instruction for parents and parent workshops to provide instruction on the systems used in school. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K162 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 360 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 46 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 89.2% % Reduced Lunch 18.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 87.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 73 73 7 90.9% 1.1% 23.9% 5.6% 3.3% 0.8% 4 33% 7.5 21.9% 25% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the data in the 2016 NYS English Language Arts assessment to the 2017 NYS English Language Arts assessment indicates the percentages of students at levels 3 and 4 was 17% in 2016 to 16% in 2017. However the number of level 1 students decreased by 2% with the number of level 2 students increasing by 3%. While overall gains were not made, after a dissection of the NYS ELA assessment, the student data shows that overall our students made gains of 16% within their levels. The NYS Math assessment indicates the percentages of students at levels 3 and 4 was 10% in 2016 to 9% in 2017. Reviewing multiple data sources including the item skills analysis, extended and short responses, student work products, periodic assessments, and math unit tests indicates a need to integrate writing performance tasks across the curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all 6th and 7th grade ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers will have strategically embedded MSQI reading strategies across the curriculum units of study. This will be measured by a overall 5% growth in student proficiency in 2019 NYS ELA, Math and Science Assessments compared to the 2018 proficiency levels. 2018-19 CEP 14  2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Beginning in September 2019, all ELA, Social Studies and Science teacher teams and the PCT teachers will include and modify accordingly effective literacy teaching across the disciplines. Teachers will engage in weekly coaching cycles for utilizing data focusing on student writing. Some of these coaching sessions include: examining student work samples, creating benchmark writing pieces, close analysis of NYSTP assessments using the ATLAS protocol (from national school reform). Teachers will engage in Professional Development with a focus on strategic reading strategies across content areas. Literacy leaders provide time, resources and support for the professional learning to be connected to the school’s literacy vision and goals. September - December All ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers All teachers Weekly Collaborative Planning Meetings, September - June All teachers During MSQI Our teacher teams (ELA & Math) will be scheduled to meet regularly for Common Planning to: EAll ELA, Social Studies and Science teachers 2018-19 CEP 16 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Literacy Leadership Team, ELA, Science, Social Studies, PCT teachers, educational consultant Literacy Leadership Team, ELA and Math PCT, educational consultant, MSQI coach ELA and Math PCT, educational consultatnt, f-status science coach, CITE consultants, MSQI coach ELA and Math PCT teachers, Literacy Leadership Team, MSQI Coach, Administrators coaching visits 24October 31November 14November 28December 12January 2January 16January 30 Mid-year Check-inFebruary 27March 13March 27April 17May 15 Exit MeetingMay 29 Daily meetings September - June  -Examine the available item analysis from periodic and benchmark assessments to provide teachers with detailed information about which strands of knowledge students know or do not know. This strategy allows teacher teams to identify students that are performing above or below grade level, including our subgroups (ELLs, SWDs, etc) - Each team uses the common planning time with the support of a leading teacher, instructional coach and or supervisor. -Teams will utilize the planning time to design multiple entry points and higher order thinking skills for units and lessons, and to meet the specific learning needs of our varied student population. Teachers and administrators will assess effectiveness of the new embedded strategic reading strategies by reviewing student work, pre and post assessments and performance tasks for each unit. Tier 1 and 2 target students Lesson plans that include writing pathways has been added to the CCLS units will be revised and modified by the individual teachers on an ongoing basis throughout the year. Teacher teams will meet to review these revisions and modify the curriculum. All Students Second Tuesday of each month during Instructional Meetings November - June weekly meetings September - June All teachers, Literacy Leadership Team ELA, Math, Science, Social studies and PCT teachers Parents will be invited to school publishing parties that showcase student work of higher order thinking prompts and tasks from curricula. Students Parents December 2018 and May 2019 All teachers, Parents Teachers and staff will communicate with parents regularly via email and class dojo regarding student performance on assessments and curricula tasks. Teachers, parents Parent Coordinator All teachers, Parents Parent Coordinator Parent Workshops - 3 times a year (November, February, June) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 17  To engage and support our families in their understanding of the Common core and rigorous instruction we will set up a Parent University. The parent university will work to educate parents in the common core/rigorous instruction through a series of classes. At the culmination of the classes, parents will receive a certificate. A review of the data including NYC School Survey, sign-in sheets for school-family engagement events, including Parent-Teacher Conferences, monthly meetings or workshops, inter-active learning activities with students and families, indicates that more outreach has to be done in this area. Therefore, we are creating a Parent University lead collaboratively by the Parent Coordinator and supported by lead teachers, the school counselor, and monitored by the principal. The parent coordinator will organize and deliver monthly workshops from Sept. 2018- June 19 on the following topics: Literacy Vision: What is Advanced Literacy? - September 2018 Supporting a Special Needs Child-October 2018 Lifelong Practices of Readers and Writers – November 2018  Achieving Success in Middle School- September 2018     Common Core State Standards/ Reading & Writing - December 2018  Common Core State Standards /Math & Science- January 2019  Technology & Safety Online- March 2019  College & Career Readiness: The Middle School Years- January/May 2019  The Next Generation Standards ELA and Mathematics – April 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders, classroom teachers, and paraprofessionals will participate in instructional teams. Resources include the MSQI literacy team (consisting of one AP, and the two Peer Collaborative Teachers, MSQI Instructional Coaches and District 32 support staff. Teachers will integrate MSQI strategic writing strategies across curriculum, Tiered Literacy Assessments Assessments & Learning Progressions into the Engage NY units for English Language Arts. Teachers of social studies will integrate Writing Pathways strategies into their Passport to Social Studies units. Similarly, the science, arts, and technology teachers will integrate the Writing Pathways strategies into their curriculum areas. Classroom teachers will participate in vertical and horizontal inquiry teams looking at student work using protocols, supported by the school administrators. School administrators, lead teachers, and coaches will participate in classroom inter-visitations. Teachers will provide differentiated support for student learning through the implementation of station teaching. On-going professional development and teacher feedback will be provided by lead teachers and instructional coaches. Per session funding will be utilized for additional team planning. Parent outreach through a Parent University, will be provided by the Parent Coordinator, supported by the teachers, and monitored by the principal. Funding will be provided for learning materials for the parents and a quarterly parent newsletter. Professional development will be provided during extended day Mondays and Tuesdays professional work and parent engagement time. The program schedule includes a weekly collaborative planning period during the day for all teachers. Formative assessment data and student work data will be used to determine which students would benefit from additional instruction English Language Arts and/or Mathematics through a Saturday Academy Program from January 2019 through April 2019. Title 3 funding will be used for an English as a Second Language class operating from November 2018- May 2019. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As a mid-point benchmark, by February 2019, all teachers will have used student data to modify and implement two curricula units of study that have content area strategic reading embedded in the rigorous academic tasks. As a result, 80% of students in grades 6 and 7 achieving performance levels 3 and 4 will show an improvement of at least 5% on the February 2019 unit of study exams in ELA and math over exams in September 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will use Degrees of Reading Power (DRP)’s and Engage NY end of unit assessments to determine if students are on track to increase performance levels of at least 5% across assessments. Student writing across the content areas aligned with the ELA CCLS rubrics, will be assessed by teacher teams using a protocol to determine student growth and next steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Social and emotional learning is one of the three pillars of the school. To support our goal of engaging a school-wide social and emotional learning plan, we have developed a social-emotional committee, led by the school dean, that has engaged in extensive school-wide planning and external collaborations. As part of being steadfast in our resolve to innovative restorative practices and holistic discipline we have engaged in ongoing critical needs assessment, and done so under the guidance of YALE University- Center for Emotional Intelligence. Our OORS data over the past two years shows an incline in student occurrences. Number of Level 1 to 5 incidents: 2017-2018 Level 1: 2 Level 2: 12 Level 3: 11 Level 4: 14 Level 5: 6 Total: 45 2016-2017 Level 1: 3 Level 2: 4 Level 3: 12 Level 4: 7 Level 5: 4 Total: 30 This shows a 26% increase in level 3 to 5 infractions. Number of Student Removals: 2017-2018 P: 7 2018-19 CEP 20  R: 1 S: 14 2016-2017 P: 3 R: 2 S: 7 This shows a 57% increase in Principal Suspensions and 50% increase in Superintendent Suspensions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students and staff will adhere to all RULER protocols and utilize anchor tools effectively (Recognizing emotions in self and others, Understanding the cause and consequences of emotions; Labeling emotions accurately, Expressing emotions appropriately, Regulating emotions effectively) resulting in a 4% increase in positive responses on the Social Emotional section of the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers on each grade level, the administration, and support staff will receive support in implementing the ruler program. - Provide teachers with professional development in RULER curriculum.-Teaches will incorporate RULER lessons into curriculum (February 2019). All students and staff SY 18-19 Unroll Charters, Mood Meters, Meta Moment, and Blue Print Strategies to all staff members(September 2018). All staff SY 18-19 -Utilize charters, meta moment, mood meters, and blue print protocols in all meetings, professional developments, one-on-one coaching cycles. -Provide teachers with social-emotional lessons on a regular basis. School supervisors, Dean, SEL committee and RULER coach School supervisors, Dean, SEL committee and RULER coach Unroll Charters, Mood Meters, Meta Moment, and Blue Print Strategies in all classes (February 2019). All students SY 18-19 School supervisors and teachers -Utilize charters, meta moment, mood meters, and blue print protocols in all classes and during recess periods. -Provide teachers with social-emotional lessons on a regular basis. Present RULER at SLT and PTA Meeting All staff SY 18-19 Parent Engagement Event that focuses on one or more anchor tools. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement School supervisors, teachers, Parent Coordinator, RULER coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The dean along with the parent coordinator will provide RULER workshops will be provided to families. Students will share RULER strategies with their guardians. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Social Emotional Committee will train teachers during professional development time. SEL committee members classrooms will serve as a lab for best practices. No additional budget is necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will have engaged in Specialized Ruler training resulting in 100% of teachers responding positively to mid-year survey aligned to Ruler practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observations of conflict/resolution incidents between students. Review incident reports in OORS. Review social emotional components on student progress reports.The SEL Committee will be responsible for review of all data, progress monitoring and revisions to professional development. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our current strengths include the development and implementation Teacher Teams, Instructional Teacher Leads and other structures:  The continued implementation of a structured Common Planning Schedule for vertical and horizontal teacher teams  The evolution of teacher teams  Professional learning time  A curriculum review team Our current need is: Strengthening our collaborative planning teams to include clear structures that effectively support the development of rigorous curricula and instruction based on student needs to ensure every student makes progress. To embed the school’s vision around how students learn best into our curriculum maps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Inquiry teams will collaboratively analyze student performance on the DRP to differentiate learning tasks to meet the diverse learning needs of their students as measured by an increase in student scores of at least 5 points on the Mid-Year and End-Year benchmarks when compared to the Baseline administered in September 2018. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Teams SY 18-19 Administrators, coaches and teacher leaders Teacher Teams SY 18-19 Administrators, coaches and teacher leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will be undertaking an inquiry approach that: - is a professional development process that teachers engage in to systematically examine practice and the goal is to improve the effectiveness of the experiences that teachers provide to students. - ensures that administration, instructional and teacher leaders support and guide teacher teams, to tailor instruction for specific performance indicators - addresses ALL our student learning needs by including tiered tasks and multiple entry points (ELLs, SWD, Above grade and struggling students). We will maximize our use of the data we regularly collect to: --Meet in 6-8 week cycles during a professional learning time to engage in an inquiry based protocol that address school wide goal and research based learning practices. - Collaborate on our teams to work to refine the integrated units, lesson and lesson series to include challenging thinking questions, projects and discussion points to engage all students; - assist teacher teams to examine the full range of student assessment data by grade, by class, and by student they will be supported by their supervisor and teacher leader; - ensure our monitoring of student CCLS aligned outcomes we will have a specific focus on our identified student subgroups (ELLs and SWDs, struggling and advanced students) to ascertain the level of support required to support improvements; -assist improved outcomes teachers will plan for multiple entry point questions and activities that challenge student thinking at 2018-19 CEP 25 their specific level and especially help students provide evidence for their thinking. We will study student work to: -Norm teacher teams in their assessment of specific aspects of the work based on CCLS aligned rubrics and assessments; -Allow teams to monitor achievement of high standards of the work across the grade/school; -Develop workable multiple entry points to create scaffolding to achieve the agreed instructional outcomes. - ensure school wide coherence all teacher teams will agree on the Protocols for Examining Student Work Samples in Literacy and Mathematics. Parent workshops will be provided on “at-home” reading strategies and higher order questioning techniques they can do to support their child at home. Teacher Teams SY 18-19 Administrators and teacher leaders Parents, SY 18-19 Parents, Teachers Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent outreach will be provided to support families in assisting their children. Monthly parent workshops and interactive family events will be planned to increase family engagement and support of literacy, mathematics, and student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, assistant principals, lead teachers, and coaches will facilitate professional development, family workshops and learning activities. Teachers and paraprofessionals will provide differentiated instruction. English as New Language Coordinator and special educators, Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) providers will collaborate for inquiry and instructional planning during extended days and during collaborative planning periods during the day. After school programs will provide support. School leaders, teachers, Parent Coordinator, and social worker will facilitate family workshops . MSQI has provided funding to allow for persession of teachers and administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers will have engaged in 1 cycle of collaborative inquiry work which would have entailed protocols and structures for: looking at student work, and making modifications to instruction/curricula based on student needs in order to see growth in one subset of targeted students. As a result of our structures and planning, we will have established coherence across grades and subjects as we promote college and career readiness and routinely require all students to demonstrate their thinking; - Progress toward completion of work on units of study, lesson series and lessons that will exhibit CCLS alignment, academic rigor, tiered tasks and multiple entry points for the variety of learners; - Administration tracking of progress of the Danielson Observations around Domain 3 that reveals instructional growth - Monitoring in school and standardized assessment data (units & mid unit tests, writing assignments, unit tasks and midline tests. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Vertical and horizontal teams will engage in weekly team meeting where they will look at student work samples, and pre and post assessments, using protocols. Teacher teams will review meeting notes, unit plans, lesson plans, student portfolios, and checklists to assess student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The Principal’s vision for shared leadership and teacher capacity building has become more evident this year through the development of “Common Planning time, teacher team Tuesday, grade data meetings and routine cabinet meetings. The Principal considered the needs of all teachers/staff in providing differentiated professional development experiences that will promote teacher and student growth. According to Advance data, many of our teachers still struggle in Danielson Domain 3. However, after reviewing a number of lesson plans, we found that Domain 1 and Domain 3 is misaligned. Additionally, after reviewing the Chancellor’s Survey, we would like to increase teacher influence by intentionally creating opportunities for teacher leadership. Needs: Although there is some improvement in Domain 3 many of our teachers still struggle with ensuring that there are DOK 3 & DOK 4 questions and formative assessments embedded in their lesson plans. As a result, we need to provide more targeted support for Domain 1 and Domain 3 in order to continue to progress in these areas. With the input of teachers as per their Summative End of Year Conferences, differentiated professional development should be provided. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, instructional leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity to design and implement lesson plans that provide opportunities for higher level thinking and include DOK 3 and DOK 4 questioning and discussion techniques. As a result of this targeted and strategic support, there will be a 20% 2018-19 CEP 28  improvement in percentage of teachers receiving a rating of “Effective” in Domain 1 and in Domain 3 for teachers who were rated “Developing and Ineffective” in Advance for the 2017-18 school year. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To achieve this goal we will: All teachers SY 18-19 All administrators and staff members Examine the ADVANCE data by teacher by Domain and select those teachers with at least one ‘Developing’ and ‘Ineffective’ ratings, across all their observations, in Domain 3 for targeted for additional support Devise two streams for the PD Plan - one for ALL staff and a more intensive, individualized support for targeted groups of teachers All teachers will view the overall ADVANCE data for 2017-18 as a prelude to focusing on goal setting based on their specific learning needs. Targeted teachers will be provided with additional instructional coaching support PD Cycles 1 & 2 schedules will commence: All teachers SY 18-19 All administrators -Meet with individual targeted teacher to co-design an action plan based on learning needs -This will include intervisitations (in school) scheduled with specific focus for each individual targeted teacher -Targeted teachers will each be paired with a ‘Buddy teacher’ -PD for ALL teachers will be devised to improve Domain 3, particular focus on 3b Questioning & Discussion - Intervisitation and PD schedules will continue as scheduled. Progress will be monitored based on: Data Tracking spread sheet devised for targeted teachers over 4-6 observations Regular meeting with supervisor to track progress toward their professional learning goal. SY 18-19 All administrators All teachers, targeted teachers 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage parents in a workshop that describes the feedback cycle and how teacher feedback directly impacts their child's educational advancement. Workshops will be led by the parent coordinator, Assistant Principals and Peer Collaborative Teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -The Power of Feedback PIL will guide administrations work with teachers, focusing on individual SMART feedback to with the intention of making a impact on teacher practice and student outcomes. -PD Schedule for whole school, teacher team with professional texts to support Danielson Teaching Framework, particularly Domain 3) - Observation schedule, 1:1 actionable feedback and upload on ADVANCE website --Instructional Coach consultant visitations to help targeted teachers. - Specific for targeted teachers, such as Buddy Teacher schedule, 1:1 mentoring, intervisitation schedule and group PD - Master schedule for teacher instructional planning for all teams and grades Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the number of effective ratings for teachers rated as ineffective or developing in domain 3. AS a result of higher teacher performance ratings, teachers will deliver more strategic instruction to their students resulting in higher levels of student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measures of progress will include: - Danielson Observation Data (ADVANCE) specifically on Domain 3 -DRP data for monitoring of student progress -Monthly reviews of Record of professional support provided for teachers 2018-19 CEP 31  - PD agenda and attendance records - Danielson Framework for Teaching Observations - Ongoing review of student assessment data to track and monitor progress across grade, class and subgroups - Available student assessment data available for review special needs students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Review of the Chancellor’s Capacity framework to Build Strong Family and Community Ties and the Chancellor’s Pillars in Practice #3, has helped us to identify the following: Strengths: Our school has shown growth in the area of parent engagement as shown by attendance at parent workshops, parent teacher conferences and Parent Association meetings. Need: Last year, the school only had 10 events for parents with an average of 20 families per event. We therefore see a continued need for expansion of opportunities for parents to understand and be involved in their child’s education. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, there will be a 20% monthly increase in family attendance at school sponsored events from last school year to this school year as measured by family attendance sheets. 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish a Saturday program that allows students to attend reading and math classes. All parents and guardians SY 18-19 Administrators, teachers Work with the Parent Coordinator and community organizations to conduct evening informational sessions to assist parents with social, family, health and legal issues. All parents and guardians SY 18-19 Teachers will work on parent engagement during their Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time. Teachers will invite parents to workshops and trainings beneficial to student learning. All teachers SY 18-19 Parent Coordinator, administrators and staff members Teachers, Administrators, and Parent coordinator Establish collaboration with local elementary schools (PS 123 and PS 86), high schools ( Academy for Urban Planning) and colleges (St. Johns University) to support the school community’s effort to ensure our post-graduation students are college and career ready. SY 18-19 All students, parents and guardians Parent Coordinator, administrators and staff members Continue to schedule Parent Learning walks to enhance and support parents’ efforts to better understand their child’s school/learning experiences. All parents and guardians SY 18-19 Administrators, Parent Coordinator and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Ridgewood Bushwick Community Center - Riseboro Creative Connections Center for the Arts Education Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 34  Parent Coordinator/Community Assistant Teachers Parent Outreach/Family Engagement time as per the UFT contract during school day. Title III Saturday Program Creative Connections - College and Career readiness Program Ridgewood/Bushwick Community Center There will be per session hours for teachers and parent coordinator available. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, there will be a 20% increase in the number of Parent activities as measured by Parent activities conducted in the same time frame in the previous school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign in sheets from all events will be used to measure progress and inform further action. Parent surveys will monitor the effectiveness of the programs and workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELA scores in bottom third of school andDRP Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) MSQI(Stari, Wilson, CSR) i-Ready i-Ready Matheletics MSQI NewsELA MSQI NewsELA Bullying Prevention Program Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group (10:1) During the school day Pull out services (10:1) Split/Triad (7:1) Small Group (10:1) During the school day Pull out services (10:1) Small Group Small Group During the school day During the school day Individual or small group During the school day Math scores in bottom third of school Science MOSL of Sept. 2018 and DRP Social Studies MOSL of Sept. 2018 and DRP -Teacher/Guidance recommendation Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Students with attendance issues -Over Age students Social and Emotional Skills and YALE University RULER Program -OORSdata 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students in Temporary housing are provided with all necessary materials to be successful in school. Our parent coordinator conducts parent outreach visits to ensure that the students are enrolled in before/after school and Saturday activities. Additional compensation is given for all field trips and student activities. The school secretary in contact with the STH liaison daily to report student attendance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by our BFSC HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. The Principal and the HR director work together to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to attract high-quality highly qualified teachers to our school include: ● Frequent communication with our Network HR Director when vacancies occur ● We have established a partnership with a local college to support the grooming of student teachers in our search for HQT candidates. ● We interview HQT candidates from the Open Market Hiring System and the Absent Teacher Reserve(ATR) Pool. ● We have established a rigorous interview protocol that includes demonstration lessons, interviews, and review of the New York State certification/licensing. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● PD sessions are attended by teachers and administrators and turn-keyed to the staff. ● 80 minute PD blocks each week for teachers and paraprofessionals. 2018-19 CEP 39  ● PD team meets regularly with the administration to discuss and plan professional development for staff based on staff needs. ● Teachers are provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities. ● Individualized PD plans are created for teachers, based on their needs, to ensure improvement. ● Coaching and mentoring are available for teachers who require additional support. ● We maintain a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and Administrators examine data, trends from assessments, and classroom observations to select instructional materials and Measures of Student Learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 361,795.00 0 12,366.00 3,015.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,748,870.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Professional Development of Staff, Hiring of Staff, Parent Engagement Computer Programs for ELL's, Saturday Academy for ELL's Professional Development of Staff, Parent Engagement Hiring of Staff, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Student Clubs and Musical, Homework Help, Saturday Academy 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 2018-19 CEP 41  used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 162, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. I.S. 162 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing an email protocol, online gradebook and using School Messenger to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 162, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 45  I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each quarter during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 47  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● wear school uniform; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ELLs are held to the same high expectations outlined in NYS Learning Standards as students who are proficient in the English language. I.S. 162K’s Title III supplemental programs are tailored to meet the needs of ELLs of all proficiency levels with the intentions of fostering improvement in content area classes. The goals of the programs are to develop and support English literacy and math skills in order to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the rigorous instructional expectations set before them on the ELA, Math and NYSESLAT exams. Our after-school ELLs club will begin in the middle of October meeting once a week for one hour on Wednesdays through May 29, 2019. All entering and emerging ELLs from grades six through eight will be targeted to attend this weekly program taught by a certified Bilingual teacher. Our afterschool program meets the needs of 10-12 Newcomers and SIFE in grades 6-8. We will use the computer based literacy program iLiT by Pearson to align the ENL language learning standards with the core curriculum, providing access to multiple genres of literature and exposure to multicultural selections to develop and enhance the necessary literacy skills through rigorous instruction. The certified Bilingual teacher will supplement the iLiT program with the EngageNY ELA Common Core aligned curriculum to meet the needs of the individual students. This material supports instruction taking place within the ELA classrooms. A preliminary assessment will be given to determine the placement level of each student. Students will then work on the iLiT program completing activities including, but not limited to, word slams, summarizing, vocabulary and word work. This reading program allows each student to have an individualized learning path. The program monitors the students’ progress through ongoing assessments providing individualized instruction that is differentiated based on the results generated from the diagnostic assessments. The ENL teacher will be able to monitor and adapt the lessons based on the data provided from the ongoing assessments. The multimedia vocabulary and comprehension games allow for additional reinforcement based on the individual learning styles learned by the teachers through learning surveys taken at the beginning of the year. Our before school program will begin on October 10, 2018 and conclude on May 31, 2019 providing additional instruction, twice a week for .5 hour on Wednesdays and Fridays for approximately 58 sessions. On Wednesday grade 6 SIFE, entering level and emerging level students will be targeted for instruction. On Friday, grades 7 and 8 SIFE, entering level and emerging level students will be targeted. This program meets the needs of 10-15 ELLs in grades 6-8. To maintain consistency, this program will also use the computer based literacy program, iLiT by Pearson, to enrich skills taught through direct class instruction. This program will continue to support the ongoing instruction in the EngageNY curriculum by supplementing lessons and using new strategies to ensure students are gaining useful skills they can utilize to acquire the English language. Two certified TESOL teachers will follow the same EngageNY Common Core Aligned Curriculum to meet the needs of the students. Students will focus on using strategic reading strategies implemented through the schools new MSQI program (which will be determined over the summer). These strategies will be used in all content areas to ensure transparency and fluidity. The TESOL certified teachers will meet during collaborative planning time and Teacher Tuesday time, after school, to discuss learning strategies and ongoing 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information assessment data collected from both class and the after school program to design an individualized learning program for ELLs. Through the iLiT program and the MSQI strategic reading strategies students’ needs will be met on a more individualized basis. Additionally, IS 162 hosts a Saturday academy program that reaches the needs of all ELLs. The goals of this program are to develop English literacy and math skills that will prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the rigorous expectations of the CCLS and to show growth and succeed on the ELA, NYSESLAT and math assessments. The Saturday Academy program is designed to meet the needs of 30 ELL and SIFE students. During their time in the program students are given specific instruction in the content areas of math and literacy with a certified TESOL teacher. The teacher will provide small group instruction to students by grade and language proficiency level. The program provides the targeted instructional needs of all ELL students by providing necessary differentiation, including scaffolds and extension activities, needed to understand and answer comprehension and computational questions written in the similar style as the ELA, math and NYSESLAT exams. MSQI reading strategies, in addition to content vocabulary, will be intertwined throughout the lessons. Scaffolds and extension activities, along with MSQI strategies will also be utilized in the Math program by providing necessary literacy skills to ELL students to solve word problems that range in difficulty. The ENL portion of the Saturday program is divided into three (3) classes. Students are grouped by grade and then by language proficiency level within their ELA and math class. Differentiated ENL instruction takes place for one hour within the classroom. A licensed TESOL teacher will execute the instruction. The Math portion of the Saturday program is provided by a certified bilingual-Math teacher. This part of the Saturday program also meets for an hour with ENL instruction pushing in to the class. The students change classrooms to alternate between ENL and Math. The ELA and math teachers will use the baseline data provided from the computer based program, IReady, to determine instructional areas in need, paying attention to short and extended written responses. IReady monitors student proficiency with the Common Core standards in ELA and math. Materials for this program are provided in both English and Spanish making it explicit and ELL friendly. Classes meet for thirteen Saturdays beginning January 5, 2019 and finishing on May 4, 2019 from 8:00am - 12:00 pm. Attendance records will be maintained by the teacher and parent notification in the parents’ preferred language will be made. Attendance will be stressed and rewarded for students who maintain a 93% attendance rate. Another supplement provided in classrooms for the benefit of students and teachers is the educational consultant that works with teachers one day per week throughout the entire school year. The consultant works with groups of teachers on improving their practice, focusing specifically on making deeper connections through academic conversations. The consultant works with teacher groups of no more than four selected by the administration. As part of the work the teachers’ classes are observed by the consultant (non-evaluative) and then they meet to discuss the observation where teachers are provided with feedback specifically focused around the work they have been doing outside of the classroom. Teachers meet with the consultant one time a week for six week sessions. The consultant is paid with non-Title III funds. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Professional development will be separated into six (6) learning cycles with different focuses for each cycle based on data from the 2017-2018 school year, including the NYC school survey, Quality Review results, Measure of Teacher Performance data, NYSESLAT scores and state test scores. Professional development for the three (3) TESOL certified teachers as well as for nine (9) other content area teachers responsible for delivery of instruction to ELLs (ELA, Math, Social Studies, Science and two Special Education teachers) will be provided by the ELA and Math Peer Collaborative teachers. This is at no cost to the Title III program. The goal of this program will be to learn “best practices” that will meet the needs of all ELLs (entering level through expanding level). A series of 39 professional learning sessions centered around instructional strategies that focus on reading and writing in all content areas will be provided. TESOL and bilingual certified teachers will receive 50% of their professional learning on topics specific to the needs of ELLs and 15% will be provided to all staff members. The topics to be covered are: Using Data to Plan Instruction for ELLs; Scaffolding Strategies for ELLs; Questioning and Discussion Strategies for ELLs; Providing Actionable feedback for ELLs; Academic Language for ELLs; Increasing Student Engagement for ELLs; Helping ELL Students Achieve their Goals and Best Practices for Highly Effective Teachers; and MSQI STRATEGIC READING STRATEGIES (strategies to be determined based on choices provided and which would specifically target our students). The trainings will be conducted periodically over the school year during Monday professional development time after school, Professional Learning Modules (PLM) will be available on common preps for teachers and during “Lunch and Learns” organized by teachers. The professional learning sessions will be provided by the PCT teachers who are turn keying information from workshops they have attended. The PCT teachers attend monthly workshops that are of no cost to the Title III program. The professional learning opportunities will positively impact the progress of our ELL students by providing our teachers with the necessary tools to be able to differentiate and scaffold their instruction, implement best practices such as station learning into their classrooms, provide scaffolds for individual ELL students and utilize multiple entry points to meet the specific learning needs of each student. In addition to the Monday professional development teachers will be able to receive hourly credits (CTLE) toward their required licensing needs through Center for Integrated Education (CITE) workshops (dates TBD) with a focus on Writing Across Content Areas and Academic Discourse. Records will be maintained through attendance sheets and agendas. Schedule of Professional Development and Collaboration for the 2018-2019 school year include (subject to change based on the needs of learners): Tentative Professional Development 2018-2019 Calendar: Cycle 1: Social-Emotional Learning in Today’s Classroom September 17, 2018 – November 6, 2018 Cycle 2: Utilizing the Danielson Rubric as an Instructional Tool November 19, 2018 – December 3, 2018 Cycle 3: Applying Social-Emotional Learning in our Classrooms December 10, 2018 - December 17, 2018 Cycle 4: NYS Next Generation Learning Standards Roadmap January 7, 2019 - February 25, 2019 Cycle 5: TBA Cycle 6: TBA In addition to the Monday Professional Development cycles, four teachers that work directly with our ELL population were selected by the administration to receive on-site support with the 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development district TDEC, Andrea Gonzalez. The teachers will focus on implementing ELL instructional strategies for the different levels of learners in their classrooms to increase student engagement to improve academic gains on the NYSESLAT exam. These instructional strategies will include but are not limited to, scaffolding and differentiating writing tasks, developing and maintaining academic discourse with content specific vocabulary and conversation stems, lesson planning to provide targeted and specific specially designed instruction. Ms. Gonzalez will work collectively with the teachers and one to one develop instructional practices. Part of the work will require classroom intervisitations with opportunities to debrief and share best practices provided by the administration and/or during teacher team Tuesday. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III program provides ongoing activities that support parent involvement, educating parents about their options within the district and community to enhance their understanding of the English Language. This program is offered at no cost to the Title III program and is provided by our parent coordinator. District 32 provided adult education courses, at various schools within district, on different days of the week. This program is free for all district 32 parents. The goal of the program is to provide the English necessary to meet the immediate needs of parents and to improve their ability to understand and use English in daily conversation. Parents are invited through monthly newsletters provided by the district printed in English and their home languages. The flyers and newsletters are posted on the Parent Buzz board centrally located outside the main office. In addition to the monthly district classes we provide parent workshops that explain how the educational system works, how they can affect the future of their children by encouraging them to complete school, pursue a college degree or pursue certification in a technical career where they will succeed. We encourage all of our parents to be actively engaged throughout their child’s time in our school by attending Parent Association meetings, attending Parent-Teacher conferences and downloading our school app to their phones and/or other devices so that they are continuously informed about their child’s education. The app and school website are available in the parents’ native language, providing access to immediate resources. Parents are shown how to translate the website at our Back to School night and during meetings with the parent coordinator. ENL parents are also invited to attend a monthly ELL Parent Meeting. These meetings take place the first Wednesday of each month. Each meeting lasts approximately 45 minutes and topics are both educational and informational. Parents will learn about: The Process of Learning a Second Language and Helping Your Child at Home. They will be provided with information about the New York State assessments and the role these tests play in the education of their children. They will be exposed to information regarding community resources available to them and their children. Notification of these meetings will be in the form of notices sent home in English and the parent’s home language with the use Google translator, posted on the school website and app. Attendance and agendas for all ENL meetings are maintained by our parent coordinator in a binder located in the main office. Presentations by outside community based organizations include neighborhood health organizations, social workers, and various public offices including 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities but not limited to the American Cancer Society, Autism Awareness, local bankers and Center for the Arts. Each presentation is generally one or two hours in length and take place during the school day so no additional funding from the Title III program is necessary. We also host monthly family engagement activities on Tuesday afternoons. These activities include but are not limited to our Fall Family Festival, Dia de los Muertes, Family Feast, Movie Night, BINGO, Mother’s Day Tea, Game Night, High School Fair and Paint Night. Through our family engagement activities we encourage our parents to take an active and supportive role in their ELL child’s education by being visible and taking part in activities. We believe our ELL students will be successful with the support of their parents, both academically and socially. These after school activities always have translation services available and notice of each activity is sent home in both English and the parent’s home language (using Google translate or the Microsoft Word translator) on the school website, the school app, on the school Twitter page, and posted on our “The Buzz” parent information bulletin board located outside the main office. A parent sign-in is always required for these events and is kept in the principal's office upon completion of the event. A portion of the Title III funding is used to purchase necessary materials for certain activities. These after school activities generally range in length from 90 minutes to two hours. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel NA NA NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL NA 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name The Willoughby School Borough Brooklyn School Number 162 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Amanda Lazerson Coach Melissa Caballero ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jillian Goodwin Teacher/Subject Area Ana Apicella/HLA Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Sheila Gorski Assistant Principal Jessica Mazzarelli Coach type here School Counselor Robert Channing Parent vacant Parent Coordinator Jazmin Orengo (pending new hir Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 360 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.06%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 2017-18 1 2 4 3 K Lang. Spanish Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 21 7 0 19 8 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 21 19 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 21 19 0 0 0 0 40 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Data gathered through the NYS standardized exams, interim assessments, conferencing and other informal assessments demonstrates a high need for ENL support in the areas of reading, writing and vocabulary comprehension. These assessments illustrate the struggle for ENL students in expressing their ideas, both orally and in writing. Students tend to answer literal questions and struggle to expand on questions that require critical thinking skills. Using this data, the ELA and ENL departments made an informed decision to utilize the EngageNY Expeditionary Learning ELA curriculum to ensure a balanced literacy approach is taken to address these needs and Pearson's iLiT program to supplement the learning in the ELA classroom. The ELA curriculum, used in conjunction with Pearson's iLiT program, will assist students in forming answers for questions, that include citing evidence, making text to text connections and text to self connections, in both verbal and written response forms. Forty percent of our ENL population is long term ENL’s. To accommodate their needs with language acquisition they are placed in our early morning ENL literacy program. Individual plans are created and implemented for all ENL’s to ensure that 2018-19 CEP 58  students are on task and have mastered the targeted skill before proceeding to the next skill. In addition to their individual learning plans, our ENL students who are also classified as students with disabilities are all invitied to participate in in our after school program and clubs to receive additional support in reading, writing and mathematics. The assessment tools used to assess the early literacy skills of our ENLs are: the NYSITELL and the Spanish LAB; oral, reading, and writing informal assessments conducted by the ENL teachers; Periodic Assessments that include Performance Series and NYC Performance Tasks; Achieve 3000 assessments and iLiT assessments. The NYSITELL provides a baseline assessment of the English literacy skills ENL students bring into the program. The Spanish LAB data is indicative of the literacy skills in L1 (the home language). Research tells us that ENLs who have a high level of literacy in L1 are more likely to advance at a faster rate with their English language acquisition because knowledge of literacy skills transfers into the acquisition of English. The informal and formative assessments in speaking, reading, and writing provide authentic data to measure the progress and performance abilities of ENL students in English. Achieve 3000 conducts a preliminary assessment in order to differentiate the levels of the texts in the program. Performance Series provides baseline data with an accurate Lexile measure to support ENL reading in the ELA classroom. This data helps us identify the authentic language needs of ENLs and those who will need added support in developing English literacy skills. These ENLs are identified and targeted for our supplemental ELL programs. ENL teachers and core subject teachers also utilize this data to identify ENL students needs and to make necessary adjustments to instruction with modifications that include but are not limited to differentiation and necessary language scaffolds. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet during scheduled Common Planning time to share and discuss assessment results from both formative and summative assessments collected. Teachers co-plan with ENL teachers, based on the collected data, to provide the necessary targeted instruction for ENL students based on the ongoing assessments. Teacher Time Tuesday, after school, is utilized as a time to conduct inquiry sessions and provide teachers with additional support opportunities through classroom intervisitations and collaborative discussions on intervention strategies for ENL and ENL-SWD students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ENLs using several data points. We collect data from the NYS ELA exam, NYSESLAT, reports from iLiT, and periodic assessments. As we examine this data we look for patterns of growth and gains. Performance Series generated baseline assessment data for all of our students serves as a measure to monitor progression throughout the year. Students first take this assessment in the fall providing initial data for teachers to use to drive and plan for targeted instruction in reading. Students take this assessment again in winter, monitoring progress from the baseline data and identifying additional areas of literacy that need to be addressed in classroom instruction. Students take this assessment again in the spring, providing a report of student gains throughout the year, and identifying areas in need of improvement that can be used as a baseline measure for the upcoming school year. In addition to Performance Series, teachers are able to disaggregate data that is generated from the HLA assessment in conjunction with the Performance Series results to better meet the needs of ENL learners. Summative assessments are given in all core subject classes that require students to demonstrate their understanding of the content through writing in addition to comprehension of the subject specific material. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During teacher team meetings, ENL teachers discuss the summative data gathered in the subject specific classrooms and through the assessment programs. This data is used to determine the needs of individual and groups of students. Supports used by teachers include providing scaffolded materials for ENL students that will assist and support their learning of the intended learning target and subject-specific standard. For example, English Language Arts teachers utilize the summative assessment data to provide language specific tasks and novels in Spanish for selected students. In addition to meeting the needs of lower performing students, teachers provide differentiated instruction for the more advanced learners by challenging them with higher-order thinking extension activities. Teachers collaborate weekly to ensure each ENL student is provided with supports that are tailored to individual needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2018-19 CEP 59  I.S. 162 uses data to guide instruction for ENLs within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework in numerous ways based on the constant and ongoing collection of data to identify the necessary academic interventions. Teachers plan structured interventions based on formative and summative assessment data specific to the learning goals for each student and based on modifications for ENLs who have IEPs. Teachers collaborate to discuss instructional strategies for ENLs and best practices that work in their classrooms for whole-class instruction, small group instruction and focused related services instruction. Teachers monitor individual student progress with checklists that are used during team meetings and to communicate with ENL students' parents. Communication with parents takes place weekly, providing parents with information regarding their child's progress in the classroom and support measures that can be used at home to ensure learning is ongoing. Academic interventions change based on the individual needs and progression of each ENL student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our ENL programs are evaluated on an ongoing basis through both formal and informal means of assessment. Outcome assessments include the HLA NYC Performance assessment, NYSESLAT, NYS Standardized exams and formative and summative assessments utilized in all core classes. Students have been grouped into Tier 1 and Tier 2 based on NYS standardized test achievement. Our students in Tier 1 will receive targeted direct instruction based on the item skills analyses of both the ELA and Math state exams. Our Tier 1 students are high level 1 students (1.90 - 1.99) and our Tier 2 students receive targeted instruction to improve their mid-level two scores. Teachers will focus small group instruction and conduct inquiry meetings during collaborative planning opportunities, twice a week, to discuss and review interventions and instructional strategies that have been used in the classes. Teachers and administration examine NYSESLAT results regarding both movement across levels and passing rates for formal assessment. NYSESLAT data is used when making student placement decisions and classroom assignments in the iLIT program. The NYSESLAT results are used to form small groups within the classroom based on the reading, listening, speaking and writing sections.ELL students are grouped based on their individual needs. Informally, teachers meet during common prep times and after school on Tuesdays during the teacher Tuesday times to conduct inquiry and planning sessions regarding students', including ENL and ENL-SWDs, progression and to establish targeted inquiry groups. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate these findings ENL teachers meet with core subject teachers in addition to administration. The results from the assessments are discussed and used with the formal and informal assessments administered in the classrooms to have an overall student performance. After reviewing the data and program availability any necessary changes are made to ensure that students are being provided with the best matched resources. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per the CR-Part 154.2, integrated and standalone instruction are delivered to ENLs in our current ENL program, as mandated. There are five ENL classes in our school, one in sixth grade, two in seventh grade and two in eighth grade. Students are grouped based on their NYSESLAT test results. ENL students receive 180 minutes of ENL standalone class taught by certified ENL teachers. Standalone instruction focuses on language acquisition techniques, with a focus on writing and vocabulary development to further support the learning in their ELA classes. There are two certified ENL teachers who provide ENL services. An integrated/stand alone model of instruction in ENL is implemented for our special education classes, one class on each grade level. In addition to the 180 standalone 2018-19 CEP 60  minutes of ENL instruction, these classes receive 180 minutes of push-in model instruction. Higher performing level ENL students are heterogeneously grouped in seventh and eighth grade classes, utilizing the push-in model of instruction to receive the mandated services. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently we have one TBE class in the sixth grade receiving math and science instruction in their native language of Spanish and integrated ELA and SS instruction in English. These students receive additional support during HLA instruction. This class will continue in seventh grade, receiving math and ss instruction in their native language of Spanish. An incoming sixth grade TBE class will be enrolled in 2017. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL students are programmed specifically to ensure that all required minutes and mandates are met in full. Entering and Emerging ENL students are programmed for 180 minutes of stand alone ENL class and 180 minutes of one integrated ENL/ELA class and one ELA class with a push-in ENL teacher. The Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students are programmed for at least one ELA class (45 minutes) and one integrated ENL/Social Studies class (45 minutes) per day, five times a week. HLA instructional minutes include 180 minutes for our sixth grade TBE class and 90 minutes for our heterogeneously grouped ENL classes in the 7th and 8th grade. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers provide content area instruction that is completely aligned with the Common Core State Standards. Science textbooks are available in the home language of Spanish and the ELA and Math curriculums can be translated, when necessary, to Spanish. Teachers use formal and informal data to inform instruction. ENL methodologies are infused in to classroom instruction enabling ENL students to access and apply prior knowledge. Students are provided scaffolds and supported with graphic organizers, webs, thinking maps, visual aids, word walls, charts, etc. to help them organize and produce their thoughts. Together with the ELA teachers the ENL teachers meet to review strategies and address concerns. Technology aides, such as Promethean boards, laptops and Ipads were added to classrooms to aid in instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ENL’s are appropriately evaluated in native language we have trained pedagogues to provide translation services when needed. As part of the ENL intake process, students who are new admits are informally interviewed in their native language through translators to determine their language dominance in addition to completing the HLIS and taking the NYSITELL. Data generated from Pearson's iLiT program, specific and targeted ENL instruction, and data collected from formative and summative assessments in the classroom will be disaggregated to ensure that the student's evaluated appropriately. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are offered and encouraged to participate in extended day activities which include academic classes and clubs. AIS services also provide SIFE students with additional support to increase literacy and mathematics. These services are implemented during the school day. Guidance Counselors are used as an intervention tool and serve as a connection between home and school. Progress monitoring will be ongoing to ensure the proper academic interventions and supports are in place. 2018-19 CEP 61  ENL students in the US for less than three years are assessed in their English and Native language proficiency. When they first arrive they are tested with the Lab-R and at the end of the academic year, the NYSITELL. Teachers use these scores to guide instruction. Once in the classroom, teachers make observation and assessment a daily practice in the areas of speaking, listening, reading and writing. They assess literacy using various assessment tools including Performance Assessments, iLiT, running records and interim assessments. Based on assessment results, students receive explicit instruction to further develop their speaking, listening, reading and writing proficiency. Some of these strategies include but are not limited to activating prior knowledge, word relationships, cognates, repeat and rephrase, hands on learning, visual aids that include word walls with pictures and explanations, vocabulary in context and modeling language patterns by expanding on student utterances. Students will also have the opportunity to demonstrate understanding through modeling, drawing, discussion, retell and cooperative groups. ENL students in the US for four to six years receive instruction using various linguistic and scaffolding strategies. Some of these strategies include group discussions and writing from personal experience. Teachers work together to assess student instructional needs using formal and informal assessment including ongoing observations, running records, checklists, conference notes, Performance Assessments, periodic assessments and NYSITELL data. Literacy and language needs by modality are determined. Teachers meet with ENL teachers during common planning to discuss specific instructional needs. Literacy is developed in individual, guided and group instruction. Students are also given native language support such as technology, translation glossaries and bilingual dictionaries. ENL students in the US for more than six years receive instruction to build academic language with respect to their literacy needs. Teachers meet to discuss and plan to help guide instruction of the long term ENL’s. These instructional strategies include but are not limited to using literary elements and genres in discussions, using content-related vocabulary in discussions, reading and writing and summarizing literature and content-area texts using a variety of comprehension strategies. All students who achieve proficiency on the NYSITELL receive testing accommodations for an additional two years. Former ENL students are serviced by a licensed ENL teacher in an integrated content area classroom. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? To meet the diverse needs of ENL-SWD within the least restrictive environment we provide all mandated services with a push in model. A fully licensed ENL teacher pushes into the ELA classroom to provide the needed support for the students. Teachers are using the EngageNY ELA and Math curriculums for ELA and Math. Both of these curriculums provide additional instructional supports and accommodations for ENL students and SWDs. Each of these curriculums have an emphasis on vocabulary development as well as writing across the curriculum through differentiation and scaffolded ENL instruction. In conjunction with EngageNY ENL-SWDs also use Pearson's iLiT online literacy program during their standalone ENL classes. The program assesses students as they read through online formative assessments that include quick checks, discussion questions and written tasks throughout the story. All students are challenged and exposed to rigorous instruction with an instructional focus on higher order thinking through questioning and discussion. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ENL-SWD's receive instruction through a push in and standalone model. A certified ENL pedagogue pushes in to work with the students to provide all necessary language instruction. The ENL providers works closely with the IEP teacher to ensure that they are working toward the students IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. Both pedagogues maintain running records to monitor progress and discuss during inquiry meetings. The collaboration aligns to the ICT "team teaching" model ensuring all students are provided with grade-level appropriate instruction based on individual needs of the student. Teachers are also utilizing station teaching in the classrooms, using data to produce student centered and teacher centered groups of instruction to better meet the diverse needs of each individual learner. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 62  Targeted intervention in the classroom includes small group instruction through station learning. Students are grouped based on targeted needs as demonstrated by classroom assessments, receiving the instruction in a different manner which can include reteaching, modeling, differentiating or incorporating technology with online programs that include but are not limited to myON, NEWSELA and Mathletics. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? IS 162 will continue to focus on higher order thinking through questioning and discussion but formative and summative data from a collection of sources, including but not limited to preliminary state exams, NYC SS and Science Performance tasks, summative unit assessments in ELA and Math, shows an increasing need to focus on improving the quality and stamina of our ENL and ENL-SWDs writing. All classroom instruction will focus on writing across the content areas, with supported instruction through station learning. Students demonstrated success through station learning, showcasing accountability and responsibility. The seventh grade TBE class will receive SS in their native language in order to support and develop stronger practices in writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not close a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are offered and afforded access to all available programs at IS 162 which include after school clubs, before school programs, academic intervention programs that include test preparation and student activities that include student government. Information regarding sign-up dates and meeting dates for all school programs is communicated to parents via the school website, school notices that are translated into Spanish and English that are backpacked, posters that are displayed in the hallways and through morning and after noon announcements. ENL teachers are highly supportive in encouraging ENL and ENL-SWD students to participate in as many activities as they can, communicating with both students and their parents about the opportunities afforded to them at IS 162. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional resources are utilized during the school day. Every classroom is equipped with a Promethean board to enhance learning with hands on experiences and visual aids. Ipads, bilingual dictionaries and language specific glossaries are used to support native language instruction. Multicultural literature representative of the various cultures are used inside the classroom. Science textbooks are available in both Spanish and English for ENL students and the ELA and Math curriculums can be translated to Spanish. Spanish language novels are available for entering level ENL students. All subject areas utilize graphic organizers, thinking maps, scaffolded questions and sentence stems, annotated text, word walls and content specific learning agendas for the class period that make students aware of their expectations. Through a school-wide initiative of station learning all subject area teachers have incorporated differentiated learning into their lessons through targeted instruction stations, grouping students based on data, including both formative and summative assessments, which allow for greater exposure to more instructional resources that include online programs that can be used in both English and Spanish. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is assessed in each program model through continuous formative assessments that produces data that is disaggregated by the ENL teacher, with assistance from the AP, and disseminated to subject area teachers as an additional instructional support. Native language support is delivered in each program model through the use of ENL specific materials that includes bilingual glossaries, translated resources and Pearson's iLiT online literacy program. This program provides data that helps to drive instruction in the ENL classroom through living data resources that monitors students' time spent reading and progression of acquiring learning targets. Students are also grouped or paired with other students who speak the same language but are at a different level of English proficiency, to assist with peer to peer translation and communication as needed when working in collaborative learning stations. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 63  Core subject curriculums are fully aligned to the Common Core State Standards as appropriate to grade level expectations, offering rigorous instruction for all students. ENLs are held to the same standard as all other students present in a grade and are expected to succeed. Utilizing IEP goals, lists of accommodations and learning survey results ENL and Special Education teachers modify lessons through annotation of texts, scaffolded graphic organizers, exam format, leveled-Lexile readings, and use of manipulatives and online resources to ensure that ENL and ENL-SWD students receive grade-level content in an appropriate delivery method for their ability. The resources throughout the building are offered to all ENLs throughout the grades. Teachers meet during scheduled common planning time and on teacher team Tuesdays to address concerns and monitor success of each student in their class, making necessary adjustments to instruction when seen fit. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ENL students before the beginning of the school year, we hold an orientation day. During this day, parents and students are invited to the school to meet their new teachers, guidance counselor and administration. Students take a tour of the building and learn about the programs we offer and what they can expect when they enter IS 162's doors as our students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, there are no language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Contractual staff development hours and days (Mondays 2:30 - 3:50) are utilized to provide all staff with the necessary ELL professional development. Our ELA PCT and Math PCT provide professional development to all staff on Mondays. Professional Development is focused on rigorous instruction that pushes ELL students to use literacy skills to meet the demands of their CORE curriculum. These workshops include but are not limited to Charlotte Danielson’s “Framework for Teaching”, Norman Webb’s “Depth of Knowledge”, and the Common Core Learning Standards. Our professional development is divided into cycles with particular focuses based on school survey results. In addition to the Monday Professional Development and Chancellor's Days professional development teachers are sent to various professional development workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners, which include Common Core Learning Standards in the Mathematics and Science Classroom, and teaching ENL students with disabilities. These staff members then turn key to the rest of the staff during a lunch and learn which is voluntary for all teachers. PLANNING FOR PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT, PROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION AND PARENT ENGAGEMENT 2017-2018 Mondays At-A-Glance 2018-19 CEP 64  Cycle 1: Student Engagement 3C Mondays Chancellor Days September 11 Station Teaching September 5 Setting High Expectations- Classroom Environment September 18 Using Scaffolds Effectively to meet the needs of diverse learners September 6 Setting High Expectations- RIGOR and Writing Across Curriculum School Wide Instructional Focus September 25 Tiered Questioning October 2 Danielson-Linking 3c and 1e Cycle 2: How Teachers Can Turn Data into Action Mondays Mondays October 9 School Closed November 13 Evaluating Success and Determining Next Steps in the Classroom October 16 Gathering, Reviewing Data & Asking Questions using NYS ELA and Math Item Skills Analyses October 23 Triangulating the Data October 30 Determining Gaps and Setting Goals November 6 Planning for Action in the Classroom Cycle 3: Building and Developing Trust/School Culture Mondays Mondays November 20 December 18 Getting to Know your Colleagues to Build Rapport and Increase Trust within the School Culture November 27 Strengthening & Enhancing existing De-Escalation and Crisis Management Strategies and Supports December 4 Impact Climate and Culture has on Daily Functioning of School Life November 7 2018-19 CEP 65  CHANCELLOR'S DAY: Establishing Trust within the School Community Writing Across Curriculum Infusion provided by CITE December 11 Getting to Know your Students to Build School Culture Cycle 4: Book Study "The Highly Effective Teacher" Mondays January 8 Needs Assessment: What do you need the most? Tip 1: Coherent, Connected Learning Progression February 5 Tip 6: Creative, Problem-Solving Culture Tip 7: Monitoring, Assessment and Feedback that Guide and Inform Instruction & Learning January 15 School Closed February 12 Moving Forward and Planning to Become Highly Effective using the Instructional Strategies from the Learning Cycle January 22 Tip 2: Strategies, Resources & Technologies that Enhance Learning Tip 3: Safe, Respectful, Well-Organized Learning Environment February 19 School Closed January 29 Tip 4: Challenging, Rigorous Learning Experiences Tip 5: Interactive, Thoughtful Learning Cycle 5: The Power of Feedback Monday February 26 Providing Actionable Feedback to our Students March 5 Guiding Students to use the Feedback to improve literacy skills across content areas March 12 Peer to Peer Conferencing and Actionable Feedback March 19 Using Feedback to meet Instructional Goals and to assist Students in meeting their Learning Goals March 26 The Impact Feedback has on Improving Student Progress Cycle 6: Book Study Goal Oriented-Teacher Choice 2018-19 CEP 66  Mondays Mondays April 9 May 7 April 16 May 14 April 23 May 21 April 30 May 28 No School Cycle 7: Promethean Learning Monday Tuesday June 4 Utilizing Technology Effectively in our Classroom to build Student Engagement June 7 CHANCELLOR PD DAY: June 11 Differentiating Learning Tasks with Promethean Resources June 18 June 25 PROMETHEAN IN HOUSE TRAINING Professional Learning Module Series 1: Learning Stations Friday, October 13: Error Analysis Stations Tuesday, October 17: Questioning and Discussion with Rubrics in Learning Stations Thursday, October 19: Student Conferencing in Learning Stations Wednesday, October 25: Chat Stations Friday, October 27: Student Feedback Professional Learning Module Series 2: Lesson Planning Dates TBD 2018-19 CEP 67  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All pedagogues, which may include bilingual speech therapists, are contractually obligated to attend professional development, as per the UFT contract, every Monday from 2:30 pm until 3:50 pm. All pedagogues receive a PD agenda and sign-in for the professional development. The sign-in sheets are collected and placed in a Professional Development binder in the Principal's office. Professional development sessions are focused on the Danielson Framework, specifically domain 3 (3b, 3c, 3d). Writing across content areas is the instructional focus this year so many of the pd sessions will focus on ELA strategies that can be extended to all CORE subject areas. ENL teachers will be encouraged to share ENL methodologies. All staff are encouraged to attend pd sessions outside of professional development provided by in-house instructional leaders, administration and network liaisons. As we develop our professional learning plan, we include ELL personnel at the school, as well as all members of our staff. We are also open to suggestions and topics that staff would like to learn and develop their practice, as well as facilitators on topics of expertise as evidenced through classroom observations. These professional development opportunities take place as part of our lunch and learn sessions where teachers volunteer to participate in the learning workshops provided by their peers. In addition to these two opportunities the administration is hosting four professional learning modular series focusing on best practices observed and information requested by teachers as stated in their professional learning surveys. PLANNING FOR PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT, PROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION AND PARENT ENGAGEMENT 2017-2018 Mondays At-A-Glance Cycle 1: Student Engagement 3C Mondays Chancellor Days September 11 Station Teaching September 5 Setting High Expectations- Classroom Environment September 18 Using Scaffolds Effectively to meet the needs of diverse learners September 6 Setting High Expectations- RIGOR and Writing Across Curriculum School Wide Instructional Focus September 25 Tiered Questioning October 2 Danielson-Linking 3c and 1e Cycle 2: How Teachers Can Turn Data into Action Mondays Mondays October 9 School Closed November 13 Evaluating Success and Determining Next Steps in the Classroom October 16 Gathering, Reviewing Data & Asking Questions using NYS ELA and Math Item Skills Analyses 2018-19 CEP 68  October 23 Triangulating the Data October 30 Determining Gaps and Setting Goals November 6 Planning for Action in the Classroom Cycle 3: Building and Developing Trust/School Culture Mondays Mondays November 20 December 18 Getting to Know your Colleagues to Build Rapport and Increase Trust within the School Culture November 27 Strengthening & Enhancing existing De-Escalation and Crisis Management Strategies and Supports December 4 Impact Climate and Culture has on Daily Functioning of School Life November 7 CHANCELLOR'S DAY: Establishing Trust within the School Community Writing Across Curriculum Infusion provided by CITE December 11 Getting to Know your Students to Build School Culture Cycle 4: Book Study "The Highly Effective Teacher" Mondays January 8 Needs Assessment: What do you need the most? Tip 1: Coherent, Connected Learning Progression February 5 Tip 6: Creative, Problem-Solving Culture Tip 7: Monitoring, Assessment and Feedback that Guide and Inform Instruction & Learning January 15 School Closed February 12 Moving Forward and Planning to Become Highly Effective using the Instructional Strategies from the Learning Cycle January 22 Tip 2: Strategies, Resources & Technologies that Enhance Learning Tip 3: Safe, Respectful, Well-Organized Learning Environment February 19 School Closed January 29 Tip 4: Challenging, Rigorous Learning Experiences Tip 5: Interactive, Thoughtful Learning 2018-19 CEP 69  Cycle 5: The Power of Feedback Monday February 26 Providing Actionable Feedback to our Students March 5 Guiding Students to use the Feedback to improve literacy skills across content areas March 12 Peer to Peer Conferencing and Actionable Feedback March 19 Using Feedback to meet Instructional Goals and to assist Students in meeting their Learning Goals March 26 The Impact Feedback has on Improving Student Progress Cycle 6: Book Study Goal Oriented-Teacher Choice Mondays Mondays April 9 May 7 April 16 May 14 April 23 May 21 April 30 May 28 No School Cycle 7: Promethean Learning Monday Tuesday June 4 Utilizing Technology Effectively in our Classroom to build Student Engagement June 7 CHANCELLOR PD DAY: June 11 Differentiating Learning Tasks with Promethean Resources 2018-19 CEP 70  June 18 June 25 PROMETHEAN IN HOUSE TRAINING Professional Learning Module Series 1: Learning Stations Friday, October 13: Error Analysis Stations Tuesday, October 17: Questioning and Discussion with Rubrics in Learning Stations Thursday, October 19: Student Conferencing in Learning Stations Wednesday, October 25: Chat Stations Friday, October 27: Student Feedback Professional Learning Module Series 2: Lesson Planning Dates TBD Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Content area teachers will conduct meetings during weekly parent outreach, specifically Tuesday Family Engagement Time after school. Translation services are provided by the parent coordinator or other staff members when needed. If other languages other than Spanish is needed, outside translators are hired. Classroom teachers reach out to the parents via email or phone call to extend an invitation to our ELL parents for a designated time. All parents and teachers meet in our parent room, room 113, and if necessary additional space is provided. At this time the following is discussed: student goals, current language development progress based on formative and summative assessments, and next steps to increase student achievement. Teachers submit monthly parent engagement forms to the principal for review and on these forms teachers indicate which students and parents were contacted and met with. In addition to the meetings on Tuesday afternoons our ENL coordinator contacts all of our ELL parents to come in and meet with her to discuss progress in the classroom, encourage enrollment in our after school and before school programs designed to offer targeted instruction for our ELL students and to monitor any changes in the student's daily life. The ENL coordinator maintains a parent phone log to record all ELL parent conversations. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Family engagement activities, Parent Association Meetings and other upcoming school events are all posted on the school website, which is available in both English and Spanish. The parent coordinator of IS 162 conducts weekly parent workshops that target the needs of all students. These workshops include but are not limited to, the high school application process, CCLS, Special Education services and ENL services. Translation is available at every meeting. We conduct monthly Parent Association meetings providing all notices and letters in both Spanish and English to better keep parents informed of school events and educational programs. Parents are reminded of meetings by the parent coordinator and through the school website. Parent meetings are also provided for parents of ENLs throughout the year. These meetings address the needs of ENLs and how their families can support their learning at home. ENL parent orientation meetings are held for parents with 2018-19 CEP 71  children enrolled in the TBE program. Monthly parent engagement activities are held which have included: Dads bring your child to work day, Dia de las Muertos, Mother's Day Tea, Bingo Night, Grease performance, Fall Festival, Family Feast and Movie Night. Date Parent Workshop Topic 10/26/17 Understanding the NYC High School Application Process 11/15/17 Keeping Communication Lines Open with Your Child How to effectively communicate with your teen, set clear boundaries, and understand what is going on in their life. 12/13/17 Cyber Safety -Keeping your child safe in today’s modern technology age 1/17/18 Homework should not be a battle or struggle -Focusing on tips for creating pride, responsibility, accomplishment and success in your child vs. tears, arguments and a struggle 2/13/18 Helping Your Child Manage Stress - Participants will learn how to recognize the signs of stress in young people and identify strategies. Discussion on actions parents can take to help their children cope with and manage stress. 3/13/18 What Parents Can Do to Help Their Children Learn -Reinforcing lessons from school at home, NYS exam information and preparation and an overview of what your child is expected to achieve this school year TBD in April Are “We” Overdoing It? -Examining the practices of giving our children the best at no cost and the negative effects this may be having on our children TBD in May Preparing your Child for their Next Steps: High School and Beyond Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amanda Lazerson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Willoughby School School DBN: 32k162 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Amanda Lazerson Title Principal Jessica Mazzarelli Assistant Principal Jazmin Orengo (pending new hir Parent Coordinator Jillian Goodwin ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ana Olivo Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Caballero Coach Coach Robert Channing School Counselor Sheila Gorski Tatyana Ulubabova Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K162 School Name: I.S. 162 The Willoughby School Superintendent: Sheila Gorski The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jillian Goodwin ENL Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We utilize the following data sources: - Home Language Information Survey - ATS RPOB report (language/geographical) - Parent Surveys and questionnaires solicited by Parent Association and Parent Coordinator - Interviews and conversations in person or over the phone with parents 2018-19 CEP 75  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language - Spanish language represents more than 90% of all home languages at I.S. 162 - Low-incidence language translations are needed for only one family (Arabic) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. - All school letters and notices are translated by the Parent Coordinator. - Low-incidence language translations are done through the use of technology resources to provide timely translations. - Letters to parents of ENLs are available on the DOE website in many languages. - I.S. 162's Safety Plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative services solely due to language barriers. 2018-19 CEP 76  - I.S. 162 will obtain from the Translation & Interpretation Unit a translation in languages other than English of the signage and forms required according to the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 and provide such forms in accordance with these regulations. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? -Parent Teacher Conferences to be held November 29, 2017 and March 8, 2018 -Curriculum Night to be held Sept. 26, 2017 and May 9, 2018 -Parent Association meetings held monthly throughout the school year. -Attendance Teacher, Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor make calls to parents as needed throughout the school year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 CEP 77   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school provides a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights to each parent, whose primary language is a covered language or who requires language assistance. A link is provided on the school website for parents to access. The multilingual welcome poster is hung in the main lobby of the school. The school safety plan contains a provision and a procedure for parents in need of language assistance to be able to communicate with the administrative offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will use a variety of methods to gather feedback from the parents: 1. Parent survey 2. SLT meetings 3. Parent Association meetings 4. Parent workshops 5. Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time 2018-19 CEP 78 
