2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K164 School Name: P.S. 164 CAESAR RODNEY Principal: ERICA STEINBERG 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 164 332000010164 PreKindergarten through Grade 5 4211 14 th Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11219 718-854-4100 School Number (DBN): 20K164 718-853-9306 Phone Number: Fax: Melissa Jamieson mschultzel@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Erica Steinberg Annie Gallagher Danielle Mayes& Judy Wong Eileen Daly Sinai Lazaro None None District Information Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-690-1633 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director: Mauricierede Govia 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY mdegovia@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-759-3930 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Erica Steinberg Annie Gallagher Judy Wong Sinai Lazaro Jan Shperling Julia Dimant Brenda Soto *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eileen Daly Danielle McCarthy Danielle Mayes Michelle Pion Georgina Jimenez Donna Salinas Jason Steinert Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 164, Caesar Rodney, is a unique place. It is a school where all children are valued, all parents are welcome and where there is constant collaboration and support among staff. Our motivated staff members build caring relationships with students and families. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 164 is expecting approximately 670 students in grades Pre-kindergarten through Grade 5 for the 2018-2019 school year. Our student population is very diverse. Over 9 different languages are spoken in the school. 21% of students are English Language Learners and 17% of students receive special education services. We have a rigorous ENL program with three full time ENL teachers, a SETTS teacher who services several students, two Academic Intervention Teachers that provide push-in and pull-out support for our upper and lower grade students. In addition we have ICT classes on every grade level and four 12:1 self-contained classrooms. These classes offer special education services to students in a warm nurturing environment. Our teachers are open to constantly learning and trying out new strategies and curriculum. Over the past five years teachers have embraced the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project literacy curriculum and the Go Math! curriculum. For the past four years teachers have worked together to create curriculum maps that are fully aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards with a specific focus on ensuring instruction is focused on meeting the needs of all students. Every grade has three to four common preparation periods to ensure common planning and practice occurs. Grade teams meet weekly to discuss Common Core aligned curriculum, analyze student work, engage in inquiry discussions, and share best practices. Technology is a staple in every classroom. We have Smartboards or Promethean boards and ELMOs in all pre-kindergarten through grade 5 classrooms, as well as our art, music, library, and science room, and a technology lab with a full time technology teacher. There are also laptop and iPad carts on every floor for student use. Teachers have laptops or iPads for instructional use. P.S. 164 has a strong commitment to the arts. We have two full time art teachers and one full time music teacher, a school chorus, a beginner band and an advanced band. We provide flexible programming for instrumental lessons. We host the District 20 Combined District Band which performed at the Borough Arts Festival a CEC Meeting and the District 20 Performing Arts Festival. Students had their artwork displayed at the District 20 Visual Arts Showcase, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Ezra Jack Keats book making ceremony and the Brooklyn Borough Arts Festival. We offer a wide range of after school activities and lunch clubs. We have academic after-school programs from students in grades K-5, Saturday Academy (Grades 3-5), an after-school ESL program offered to all ENL students, Parents as Arts Partners Animation Program, a family literacy after school program for families new to the country, a parent/community gardening after school program, dance after school program and band afters school program. We offer science, art and library lunch clubs. Beginning in the 2017-2018 school year, P.S. 164 partnered with both CAMBA and 21st Century Leadership after school programs. The CAMBA and Leadership programs serve approximately ___ students daily. These programs provide a seamless day for students and allow them to participate in clubs, homework help and recreation activities. P.S. 164 has partnerships with Rioult Dance, Wingspan, Studio in a School, Ballet Tech, Trust for Public Land, Smartworks and MyLibraryNYC.org. Some of the celebrations and highlights of P.S. 164 are monthly Citizen of the Month awards, STEAM Fair, 100 th Day of School Museum for all students, pep rallies for New York State exams for students, a talented beginner band that focuses on learning new instruments, an advanced band that focuses on playing difficult and challenging music, All of Us Club, Dance Club, a Robin Hood library, parent ESL classes, parent citizenship classes, ZUMBA classes after school for parents, dress down days to benefit charities, a Talent Show, Movie Nights, weekend Family Festivals, a full working dental office, eyes exams and free Warby Parker glasses for all students in need and many classroom celebrations. This past year we celebrated all cultures at P.S. 164 with pot-lucks 2018-19 CEP 10  and craft nights for Lunar New Year, Black History Month, Hispanic Heritage, Women's History Month, Bengali Independence, Cinco De Mayo, Math and Science Night, Healthy Family Fun Night and an International Family Night. Administration sends staff weekly notes every weekend so that staff knows exactly what is expected and upcoming. Administration is in classrooms observing staff and providing feedback daily. This year our Professional Development Team worked tirelessly to make sure the staff felt supported through professional development. Our school’s professional development plan is based on staff surveys, staff needs assessment, feedback from observations, curriculum and DOE initiatives. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special student populations include English as a New Language (ENL) students, Students with Disabilities and Gifted & Talented students. Specific needs include differentiated instruction, targeted professional development and strategic staffing choices and programming. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress over the past year is Collaborative Teachers. This year administration put an increased emphasis on common planning, vertical teams, inquiry work and distributive leadership. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, Collaborative Teachers is the area in which we rated the highest. According to the School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together and 100% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. In addition, 98% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively. In addition to inquiry teams on each grade, P.S. 164 has a Core Inquiry Team comprised of teachers on each grade level as well as an ENL teacher, a STEM teacher, the Principal and both Assistant Principals. The Core Inquiry Team meets monthly for vertical planning, student work analysis and inquiry share out. Our work in Collaborative Teachers can be seen across the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide:  100% of teachers say that they design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELL) proficiency and students with disabilities).  100% of teachers say that they feel respected by other teachers at their school.  98% of teachers say that teachers respect other teachers who take the lead in school improvement efforts.  96% of teachers say that at their school teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels.  93% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development.  91% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. Our key area of focus for this school year is Rigorous Instruction. We made this decision collaboratively based on feedback from our Superintendent and results from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. This school year we will focus on Quality of Student Discussion. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide only 60% of teachers say that students build on each other's ideas during class discussion. In order to improve this in the coming year, we have planned intervisitations, focused walk throughs, vertical planning and ongoing professional development. Professional development will focus on rigorous instruction, scaffolds and supports for ENL students and Students with Disabilities, 2018-19 CEP 11  engaging all students, Socratic Seminar and student to student discussion techniques. Professional development will be facilitated by administration, lead teachers and TC staff developers and will be prominently featured in our Monday afternoon PD cycles. In addition, administrators will rate indicator 3b on all observations to provide teachers with actionable feedback to improve their ability to engage all students with quality questioning and discussion techniques. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K164 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 709 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 37 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 6 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.5% % Reduced Lunch 19.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 41.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.12 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 60 62 95.9% 0.7% 16.8% 1.6% 43.2% 1.3% 2 0% 6 58.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Data was gathered from the most recent Quality Review Report, School Quality Guide, Framework for Great Schools Report, Item Skills Analysis Tool, school based assessments, and projected goals for 2017/2018. As per the most recent Quality Review results and our the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, our school has collaboratively created a rigorous curriculum across grades and subject areas, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). 2. Based on the state test scores, school survey results and a review of our SLT parent survey, staff meetings, Danielson data and feedback from our Superintendent, a need for an increased emphasis on engaging and supporting ENL students has been identified. As of June 2018, 21% of all ENL students in K-5 are reading at or above benchmark level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 26% of all ENL students in grades K-5 will achieve level 3 benchmark as measured by Teachers College Reading Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Teachers College Reading and Writing Project units of study will continue to be implemented, using workshop model pedagogy, in Reading and Writing for all students, K-5. All students Grades K-5 Ongoing throughout the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, TC Staff Developers  Title III after school program will support the needs of all entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding ENL students in grades K-5.  Academic Intervention Services providers will continue to support the needs of all identified struggling students Entering and emerging ENL students grades K-5 Ongoing throughout the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, ENL teachers, Academic Intervention Services teachers, classroom teachers Grade 2 struggling students Families of ENL students Ongoing throughout the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, ENL teachers, Academic Intervention Services teachers, classroom teachers  Teachers will continue to utilize Monday afternoon Parent Engagement sessions to provide families with workshops centered on Common Core aligned literacy curriculum.  Title III funds will be used to provide parents with a family literacy after school classes.  Teachers will receive staff development around engaging in Inquiry work around scaffolds and supports to meet the needs of ENL students. All teachers, Grades K-5 Ongoing throughout the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, TC Staff Developers, District 20, Brooklyn South 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 15  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All teachers will utilize Monday afternoon Parent Engagement sessions to provide families with workshops centered on Common Core aligned literacy curriculum. Teachers, E. Daly and S. Cohen will continue to provide family literacy afterschool classes for families of ENL students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TCRWP Contract to include: K-2 Staff Developer and a Grades 3-5 Staff Developer (10 day with each), 40 Conference Day tickets for classrooms teachers, 1.5 days with TC Data Specialist, 10 calendar days for the Principal and 2 mini-institutes for Assistant Principals.  Departmental programming on grades four and five to better target literacy instruction and provide students  with college and career readiness. Stronger emphasis on ENL push-in model across K-5 to increase collaboration between ENL teachers and classroom teachers.  Weekly common planning time for all teachers Grades Pre-Kindergarten-Grade 5.  Global Language Project providing Professional Development for teachers in Grades K-5. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019: TCRWP Running Record Assessments (K-5) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) May 2019: TCRWP Running Record Assessments (K-5) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 87% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (i.e. by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behaviors, and feelings.) According to Advance MOTP data, 99% of teachers were rated effective or highly effective in the area of “Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport” and 96% of teachers were rated effective or highly effective in the area of “Managing Student Behavior” of the Danielson Rubric. 2. Based on the School Quality Guide, a review of our SLT parent survey, staff meetings, Danielson data, observational data and feedback from our Superintendent a focus on social-emotional learning and a need to increase in students’ ability to self-manage their own behavior has been identified. 3. Teachers implement a Sanford Harmony which is Social Emotional Curriculum with students daily in the classroom. the program focuses on empowering students to communicate, cooperate, connect, embrace diversity and resolve conflict. The program helps build positive relationships among students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to increase student independence and ability to self-manage their own behavior, a formal Behavior Committee will meet monthly to discuss students' social-emotional needs and implement a behavior management system, such as PBIS, schoolwide. This will result in a 5% decrease in OORS occurrences (non-accident related). 2018-19 CEP 17 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Behavior Committee will create consistent behavior expectations for the entire school and implement in each classroom. (ex. Bucket fillers, PBIS) Work with the Social Worker, Guidance Counselor and Psychologist to teach our students skills of stress-management, emotion regulation, executive control, and overall physical and emotional well-being. This includes bringing in a Conflict Resolution/Girls Group Trainer to help empower our female students in grades 4 & 5. All teachers including clusters, all students Ongoing throughout the year: 9/18-6/19 All teachers including clusters, all students Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Administrators, all teachers, school aides, guidance counselor, social worker Administrators, all teachers, school aides, guidance counselor, social worker, Conflict Resolution/Girls Group Trainer Administrators, all teachers, school aides, guidance counselor, social worker Administrators, all teachers, school aides, guidance counselor, social worker Work with the All of Us Club to create a caring, compassionate and cooperative school environment. Students learn how to express their feelings in a healthy way and resolve conflict. All of US Club helps students boost their self esteem, become empowered to solve problems creatively and non-violently, and think of solutions to problems they see in their community and the world. All teachers including clusters, all students Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19during lunch/recess lunch club Professional Development on Danielson Domain 2, Discipline Code, Assemblies on community building, bullying, positive choices, Common Preps, Weekly Grade Meetings, Inquiry Team Meetings, Chancellor’s Professional Development Days, Common Planning Time, Weekly Professional Development. Continued implantation of Sanford Harmony lessons in all classes. All teachers including clusters, all students Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19specifically during the Monday PD time and common planning time. Family Engagement Parents  Communication Notebooks  September back to school night conferences; classroom orientation including classroom and school wide goals; curriculum overview  Monday parent engagement time Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration, CBO directors 2018-19 CEP 18  Workshops during PTA meetings  Monthly School newsletter   Camba and 21st Century Leadership parent workshops School Website 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A Social-Emotional parent group that will continue to meet monthly to plan family events to support parents with behavior and social-emotional growth. CAMBA and 21st Century Leadership afterschool programs will provided parents with ongoing workshops to help them best support the needs of their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Provide consistent expectations for staff, students and parents through a Staff handbook, Student Handbook and parent handbook. Administration, staff members, parents, guidance counselor, social worker, and scheduling adjustments for assemblies, professional development, and team meetings. The Behavior Committee will work with school leaders to implement a behavior management program to include:  Working with selected classes to plan and execute monthly community building assemblies  Working with the Technology teacher to implement cyber bullying lessons and a cyber bullying assembly Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. OORS data will be reviewed monthly at School Safety Meetings. Parent feedback will be recorded at monthly SLT and PTA meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 19  OORS data, parent feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data was gathered from feedback from the superintendent, Advance classroom observations, the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, school based assessments, and projected goals for 2018. As reflected in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide:  89% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school take responsibility for improving the school  87% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school are eager to try new ideas.  94% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school feel responsible that all students learn. In addition, according to Teachers College Running Records June MOSL data, 79% of all ENL students in K-5 are reading below grade level benchmark standards. And 79% of students with IEPs are reading below grade level benchmark standards. Based on analysis of Teachers College Running Records June MOSL data and analysis of the 2017-2018 state test cut scores we have determined that continued inquiry work across the school that focuses on Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners is necessary. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate as part of a data inquiry team in order to analyze student work products, discern student strengths and weakness, research potential strategies and tailor instruction for all students; including 2018-19 CEP 21  students with disabilities, English Language Learners and advanced students measured by state test scores, Teachers College reading level data, classroom observations and the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? TCRWP units of study will continue to be implemented using workshop model pedagogy in reading and writing for all students, Grades K-5, All Students, K-5 Administration, All TC Staff Developers Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Administrators identified an in house core inquiry team made up of representatives from every grade. Inquiry team will continue to meet regularly to collaborate and discuss student work, best practices, and next steps for the school. Grade level inquiry teams will continue to meet bi-monthly. Professional development for staff will continue to focus on collaborative inquiry work, providing effective feedback for students aligned to the rubrics and increasing opportunities for self and peer assessment as well as reflection. All Teachers & Administration Communication with parents incorporating the work that comes out of the teacher teams will continue to be provided: All parents at PTA meetings at SLT meetings    During Tuesday afternoon parent engagement time  Through each child's communication notebook  at parent Workshops All Teachers & Administration Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ENL, AIS Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ENL, AIS, TC Staff Developers Administration, All staff, SLT members, PTA executive board Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19as well as Monday afternoons during UFT time. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Inquiry work will be discussed with parents at PTA meetings, SLT meetings and during Monday afternoon parent engagement time beginning in September 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  Administration, All Teachers (Classroom, Cluster, ENL, AIS) Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Inquiry Teams are responsible for creating tracking forms for their target students and uploading them to the PS164 Google Drive. These tracking forms will be analyzed in January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP running records and Inquiry tracking forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data was gathered from our most recent Quality Review, School Quality Guide, Item Skills Analysis Tool, school based assessments, and projected goals for 2018. As per our most recent Quality Review, our school has collaboratively created a rigorous curriculum across grades and subject areas, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Based on the 2017-2018 state test cut scores, school survey results and a review of our SLT parent survey, staff meetings, Danielson data and feedback from our Superintendent, a need for an increased emphasis on engaging and supporting Students with Disabilities students has been identified. As of June 2017 27% of all Students with Disabilities students in K-5 are reading at or above benchmark level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective school leadership will impact pedagogical practices resulting in improved student outcomes which will have an impact on the student achievements of students with disabilities in the area of English Language Arts whereupon 30% of all Students with Disabilities in grades K-5 will achieve level 3 or 4 benchmark as measured by Teachers College Reading Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? TCRWP units of student will continue to be implemented by using workshop model pedagogy om reading and writing for all students in grades K-5. All students grades K-5 The SIT will continue to meet bi-monthly to review the progress of each student with an IEP and address strategies for pedagogical improvement Students with Disabilities Parallel teaching will continue to be the primary method of instruction in the ICT classrooms in order to reduce class size and address student's IEP instructional goals. Data drive, small group, targeted instruction will continue to be used to address the needs of individual learners. Teachers will continue to plan and execute four parent workshops over the course of the school year that will describe curriculum to include the reading and writing workshop. Parents /Families Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, Classroom Teachers, TC staff developers Administration, School Psychologist, IEP Teacher, Classroom Teachers, SIT team members Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers Administration will hold Town Hall meetings with parents to discuss parent concerns and provide opportunities to observe their child's classrooms and participate in their learning. Parents will continue to be invited to end of writing unit publishing parties and other end of unit celebration. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Bi-monthly Parent Workshops led by teachers and bi-monthly Town Hall meetings led by administrators Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TCRWP Contract to include: K-2 Staff Developer and a Grades 3-5 Staff Developer (10 day with each), 40 Conference Day tickets for classrooms teachers, 1.5 days with TC Data Specialist, 10 calendar days for the Principal and 2 mini-institutes for Assistant Principals.  Departmental programming on grades four and five to better target literacy instruction and provide students with college and career readiness.  Weekly common planning time for all teachers Grades Pre-Kindergarten-Grade 5. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. TCRWP running record benchmark assessments will be administered monthly and entered into Assessment Pro bi-monthly. Data on all sub groups will be analyzed by inquiry teams in November, February, April and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP running record benchmark assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our most recent Quality Review, families reported that all teachers host meetings, conduct workshops, and make phone calls to families, to communicate high expectations for students, especially during parent engagement time and at curriculum nights. Teachers also distribute to families, grade-specific newsletters that outline units of study, sample tasks, and tips for working with children at home. During the interview with families, participants stated that staff members keep them informed of their children’s progress through emails, phone calls, progress reports, and notes in their children’s notebooks. Families also stated that they are invited to visit classrooms and participate in events such as workshops that train them to use web-based programs to support their children’s readiness for the next grade. In turn, some volunteer as career speakers in classes, help package supplies for science activities, contribute time for a variety of skill building activities for other families, and help with special projects such as a recent 100 days of school celebration of student projects. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 5% of parents did not agree or strongly agree that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. 24% reported that since the beginning of the school year, they have not been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. On the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide we received a 3.51 in Strong Family-Community Ties. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide we received a 4.04 in Strong Family-Community Ties. Our goal is raise this score to a 4.2 during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all families will be invited to take an active role in the classroom. They will be invited in for celebrations, to be reading partners and to observe classroom instruction. This will result in a rating of a 4.20 or above in the area of Strong-Family Community Ties on the 2019 School Quality Guide and Framework for Great Schools Report. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Create additional parent committees: celebration/school event committee, the gardening committee, the wellness committee, and the social emotional committee. They will meet monthly during parent engagement time with an administrator, our parent coordinator, and teacher representatives. Parents/Families Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Parents/Families Ongoing Administrators and Parent Coordinator Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers through the year: 9/18-6/19 Teachers and/or grade teams will continue to plan and execute two parent engagement workshops each month for students and parents which include the core content areas, celebrations, etc... Administration will hold Town Hall meetings with parents to discuss parent concerns and provide opportunities to observe their child(ren)'s classrooms and participate in their learning. Parents will be invited to end of writing unit publishing parties and other end of unit celebration. Parents/Guardians will be invited the third Friday of every month to read with their children for Parents as Reading Buddies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents/Families Ongoing through the year: 9/18-6/19 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CAMBA and 21st Century Leadership will work with PS164 this year to support family and community engagement 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. One Monday afternoon Parent Engagement Time a month will be devoted to committee meetings so that teachers and administrators can participate in meetings. Schedule adjustments will be made as necessary to accommodate committee activities and events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress towards this goal will be measured through feedback from parents and guardians at SLT and PTA meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Framework for Great Schools Report and School Quality Guide Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K – Gr. 2: Reading two or more levels below TCRWP reading level benchmark Gr. 3 – 5: Reading two or more levels below TCRWP reading level benchmark and/or Performance Level 1 or 2 score on the 2018NYS ELA K – Gr. 2: Score of 50% or below on the previous grade’s End of Year Go Math! Summative Assessment Gr. 3 – 5: Score of 50% or below on the previous grade’s End of Year Go Math! Summative Assessment and/or Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Staff will deliver the instruction through flexible, small groups and one-to-one support. During the school day, after school and Saturday School Staff will deliver the instruction through flexible, small groups and one-to-one support. During the school day, after school and Saturday School Students at risk for ELA will be instructed utilizing the following programs/strategies: re-teach of the mini lesson, guided reading, strategy lessons, Wilson/Fundations support, Level Literacy Intervention, Preventing Academic Failure At-risk instruction (Level 1 and 2 students) or enrichment instruction (Level 3 and 4). Programs include additional literacy support, small groups, and guided groups. Students at risk for Math will be instructed utilizing the following programs/strategies: re-teach of the mini lesson, remedial strategy work, automaticity with math facts, and Go Math program which includes an RTI 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Social Studies Performance Level 1 or 2 score on the 2018NYS Mathematics Test Teacher recommendation and/or Performance Level of 1 or 2 on the 2018NYS Science Test Teacher recommendation; teacher created assessments form 2018/2019 school year At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Identified through the PPT and RTI processes component and an enrichment piece. All students in grades 3-5 may attend after school and Saturday school programs for at-risk instruction (Level 1 and 2 students) or enrichment instruction (Level 3 and 4). Students will receive support in science by engaging students in grade appropriate reading of targeted non-fiction science texts through shared, close reading, guided and independent reading Students will receive support in social studies by engaging students in grade appropriate reading of targeted non-fiction social studies texts through shared, close reading, guided and independent reading. At-risk guidance service supports students in need and provides whole class support. Other types of counseling supports are pulling out/pushing in to support students that are struggling due to either academic or social issues. This service is provided to specific students identified by our PPT Team in conjunction Staff will deliver the instruction through flexible, small groups and one-to-one support. During the school day, after school and Saturday School Staff will deliver the instruction through flexible, small groups and one-to-one support. During the school day, after school and Saturday School One to one/Small group During the school day 2018-19 CEP 32  with the parent. Identified students are pulled out to work one on one or in a group with the guidance counselor, psychologist or social worker. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 60 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Children who are identified as STH are offered academic intervention services in English Language Arts and Math. They are also invited to attend extended day and after school. If necessary, the child in temporary housing may receive at-risk counseling based on the need. If the student's performance is falling below level grade level, the child will be included in an academic intervention group. The school budget has a set aside of one hundred dollars for each student in temporary housing. These funds will be used for emergency supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff at P.S. 164 are highly qualified. To encourage professional growth and retain teachers, P.S. 164 provides ongoing professional development to teachers based on professional goals, interests, needs assessment, Danielson data and current trends. Professional development is provided by, but not limited to, school-based administration, school-based instructional leads, Teachers College, Brooklyn South, District 20, and other contracted providers. Teaching assignments are determined by administration based on instructional needs of students and with consideration of teacher preference. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Several times throughout the year, teachers complete a Professional Development Survey indicating their greatest areas of interest and need. Throughout the year we will continue to provide opportunities for professional development on the following topics: Teachers College curriculum and implementations, Go Math! Curriculum and implementation, MOSL, technology, parent involvement, Fundations, Teacher Effectiveness, Integrated Co-Teaching, academic vocabulary, close reading, best practices for IEPs, assessments, analyzing data, best practices for ELLs, text complexity, Music instruction, vocabulary acquisition, counseling, RTI, UDL, strategies for supporting various subgroups, DOK, CCLS and Instructional Shifts. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 36  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents and children are invited to an Open House where PreK teachers introduce elementary school expectations and curriculum. Letters are sent over the summer to parents welcoming parents to the school community. The letters also ask parents to begin preparing their children for the separation process. At the end of the school year we host a Meet and Greet breakfast in our school yard for new incoming families as well as returning families. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have formed a MOSL committee that has met and agreed upon assessments to be administered this year. Grade level meetings are opportunities where assessment measures and growth of students are discussed. Inquiry meetings are held regularly to analyze assessment data and decisions are made to drive instruction. We have also formed a Professional Development committee that meets monthly to discuss weekly professional development opportunities for staff. The committee reviewed all surveys and prioritized based on the needs of the school. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 37  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 445,566.00 122,835.00 12,366.00 0 3,342,672.00 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) See action plan See action plan See action plan See action plan 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 38   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 164, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 164 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter and school website designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  Families will be invited in for Parents as Reading Buddies the third Friday of each month. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 164, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 2018-19 CEP 42  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The program design is guided by the research based youth program quality model focusing on four key areas of positive youth development; safe environment, supportive environment, interaction and engagement creating spaces. The partnering agencies in this proposal will offer project based activities aligned with common core learning standards to increase students math and literacy acquisition, school day attendance and engagement, high school readiness and SEL. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Leadership program will provide enrichment in core academic areas including reading, writing, mathematics and science to support common core standards at least two days per week for up to thirty weeks. Leadership program will engage students in project based learning in and through the arts as well as a wide variety of enrichment and youth development services at least two days per week for up to thirty weeks. Leadership program will provide participants families and other community members the opportunity to serve as members of our 21st CCLC program advisory board to increase levels of community collaboration in planning, implementation and sustaining the program. Leadership program will offer services approximately one time per month for parent involvement through a variety of family literacy and engagement workshops, classes and referrals. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The program coordinator will serve as a staff member and an education liaison with full working knowledge of all facets of the school day to ensure that after school is fully aligned with the school day curriculum, school and district goals and common core learning standards. Certified school day teachers will provide after school academic enrichment activities utilizing creative, inquiry based, and differentiated learning strategies to reinforce math and ELA concepts learned during the school day in small groups and one on one. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 2018-19 CEP 47  Marquis Studios Keys to Abundant Life Inc. Global Language Project TBD TBD 25 Art based youth development Cooking for students and families Professional Development for Teachers Will provide arts based youth development services celebrating the culturally diversity. Will provide a parent/child workshop culminating in a battle of the schools cook off event. Will provide district wide professional development workshops to enhance teachers and program staffs ability to support language acquisition in content area for ELLs and SWDs. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TBD Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of 2. 3. 2018-19 CEP 48  4. their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The principal alongside the grant director Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Marquis Studios, Keys to Abundant Life, Global Language Project- Meetings will be set up monthly with program director and principal to discuss program needs. Data sorter will be used next school year to identify conically absent students. Data sorter will be used as an engagement tracker; we can analyst if engagement strategies are working or not. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. TBD Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018-June 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III supplemental programs will consist of two after school programs. After careful analysis of our 2018 NYSESLAT data we found that 49.6% of students tested Transitioning or Expanding. The first Title III program will consist of two classes and will serve from Transitioning to Expanding ELLs in grades 2 through 5. This Title III after school program will meet March through May for the 2018-2019 school year. The focus of this Title III program will be on strengthening students' speaking, listening, reading and writing to prepare for the NYSESLAT. To create an engaging program, we will source out new resources as well as continue to use Scholastic Guided Reading Short Reads that were previously purchased. Guided Reading Short Reads gives students the practice they need to read and understand the complex, informational texts that they encounter every day. Short Reads offers a wide range of subjects and text types and allows students to expand their academic and domain-specific vocabulary and deepen their comprehension and analytical skills. Instruction will be provided by teachers through flexible programming. The classes will meet twice a week for four weeks at 1.5 hour sessions. This program will be taught by one of our certified ENL teachers and a certified general education teacher. Attendance will be taken during each session on our official after school attendance template and will be submitted to the Assistant Principal at the conclusion of the program to keep on file. The office keeps a copy of parents' preferred language on file and will use this information when sending out after school invitations and all parent communication. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All Title III Program staff will receive training from the Borough Support Center around working with ENL students, from our ENL teachers (C. Fishbane, E. Levin and L. Coyle) around Vocabulary and Language Acquisition and NYSESLAT, the District 20 BFS will work with Title III teachers on Specific Considerations for English Language Learners. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year we will hold workshops for Title III teachers throughout the year on vocabulary acquisition, using technology to engage ELLs, differentiation, and effective methods for working with ELLs. This professional development will directly impact and guide instruction throughout the Title III afterschool programs. Professional development for Title III afterschool teachers will occur on Monday afternoons every other month from 2:45-4:00. Tentative dates are: 10/15, 12/17, 2/11, 4/15 and 6/17. These professional development opportunities will be no additional cost to the program. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The second Title III after school program will meet from November 14, 2018 through February 6, 2019 for two hours per week. This after school program will be a family literacy program that will serve our ELL newcomers in grades K-5 and their families. This Title III after school program will focus on language and vocabulary development through high interest fiction and non-fiction texts paired with engaging hands-on experiences. Students will use the Language Power program from Teacher Created Materials which will be purchased with Title III funds. Language Power is a highly differentiated, thematically-based instructional resource. There is a K-2 Kit and a 3-5 Kit as well as supplemental texts that will be purchased for all students in the Title III program. We will also be expanding our library collection for ENL classrooms and will be purchasing leveled text from Heinneman to support students and their families. This program will meet once a week for seven weeks at 2 hour sessions. This program will be taught by one of our ENL teachers, as well as a current second grade teacher, Ms. Daly, who is a certified general education teacher with a Master one of our certified ENL teachers, as well as a second certified teacher and Ms. Daly, who is a certified general education teacher with a Masters in Reading and has 29 years of experience. A bilingual Chinese paraprofessional, a bilingual Bengali paraprofessional and our bilingual Spanish Parent Coordinator will also participate as a translators and liaison to the parents during this family after school program. These paraprofessional after school positions will be funded from our after school budget as needed to best meet the needs of our school community. This program was promoted at our School Leadership Team Meeting and Parent Teacher Association Meeting with translators. Translated invitations will be sent home with students via backpack. We will also post signs at entrances throughout the building and the librarian will post the invitation on the school’s website. Attendance will be taken during each session on our official after school attendance template and will be submitted to the Assistant Principal at the conclusion of the program to keep on file. The office keeps a copy of parents' preferred language on file and will use this information when sending out after school invitations and all parent communication. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 2018-19 CEP 52 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 53  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Caesar Rodney Borough Brooklyn School Number 164 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Erica Steinberg Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Craig Fishbane Teacher/Subject Area Elena Levin/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Mary Beth Lynch/ SETTS & IEP T Related-Service Provider Ramon Delgado/Psychologist Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Jan Shperling Coach School Counselor Patricia Mulhall Parent Sinai Lazaro Parent Coordinator Solange Cisneros-Steinert Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Medina Perez Other (Name and Title) Lauren Coyle/ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 54  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 704 Total number of ELLs 156 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE Lang. Mandarin Mandarin School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 2017-2018 K 1 1 1 0 0 2 0 0 3 0 0 4 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 164 uses a variety of tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These tools include Fontas and Pinnell and TCRWP Running Records and assessments. The data from these tests reveal that our newly arrived ELLs need support in phonics, vocabulary acquisition and decoding as well as higher-order thinking skills. By utilizing this data, we are prepared to meet the needs of these students, providing support during the entire school day, including both classroom time and ENL periods. As our students become more proficient in English, the data indicates that more support is required in vocabulary acquisition and higher-order thinking skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 55  For the 2017-2018 school year teachers used Fundations and Words Their Way as two resources for teaching phonics and phonemic awareness. For the 2018-2019 school year Kindergarten and grade 1 teachers will be using the new Teachers College Word Study program as well as supplementing with Fundations and Words Their Way. All other grades will continue to use Fundations, Words Their Way and TCRWP Assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The Language Proficiency Team at PS 164 evaluates the success of our ENL and ELL programs through standardized testing, portfolio assessment and teacher observations. As measured by the NYSESLAT, we realize there is room for improvement. The school has been successful at moving students to higher levels of English proficiency but has had some difficulty in helping the most advanced students reach the commanding level of proficiency. These struggles are highlighted in the ELA scores, where ELLs have struggled to score above level 2. Similarly, ELLs have struggled to reach proficiency in math. Our in-house evaluations (along with the latest research) indicate that the greatest problem for our ELLs is in the content area of academic language. Our students--while learning a new language--must also utilize that language to comprehend a challenging curriculum. To help accelerate this process, our classroom teachers have received staff development from our ENL instructors on the methods of scaffolding instruction and providing direct vocabulary instruction to enable our English Language Learners to meaningfully participate in classroom lessons. Content-area social studies and science lessons are provided in the ENL classroom. During math lessons, our classroom teachers will be providing targeted instruction to help ELLs acquire Math vocabulary and grasp mathematical language. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? For the 2017-2018 school year we had two AIS teachers and three ENL teachers to support students. For 2018-2019 we will be adding an additional AIS teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Langauage Profiiency Team (LPT) used data from state tests (including the NYSESLAT, the ELA and the New York State Mathematics Exam), city-wide periodic assessments, in-house formative assessments and portfolio assessments to determine what interventions are required for individual ELLs and what changes are required for the core program to support the learning of all ELLs. Following the framework of RTI, the school’s primary focus is core instruction in the classroom. Testing data indicates a steady progression of most students from the beginning level of language acquisition to the advanced level. There has been a school-wide pattern of transitioning students in the upper grades having difficulty in attaining full proficiency. Our LPT has worked with consultants and have come to two conclusions: 1) that this is a city-wide problem, not confined to our school and 2) that a key method for addressing this challenge is intensive vocabulary instruction. Our LPT thus determined that core instruction needed to be changed to meet the needs of our ELLs. Our faculty has undergone staff development in explicit vocabulary instruction, utilizing the approaches demonstrated in the professional text “Bringing Words to Life” (Kukan). Our LPT team has also determined that to meet the rigorous demands of the Common Core, faculty will require staff development in utilizing complex texts for English Language Learners. Staff developers from Teacher’s College will begin providing this training in the fall. Our ELL specialist from our network will also support us in teaching ELLs. Although we strive to implement a core instructional unit that meets the needs of all ELLs, there will be children who require further interventions. Following the RTI guidelines, struggling students are evaluated through multiple assessments, both in English and in the native language. The school screens all newcomers when they are first admitted to determine the level of prior schooling and prepare to address any special learning needs. The LPT meets as needed to evaluate the needs of any struggling English Language Learner. Support services may include: bilingual instructional support by a licensed paraprofessional, phonics and decoding classes with the SETSS teacher in the Wilson Program, targeted small-group AIS instruction in math or literary and guidance counseling. For students who are not responsive to these Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions, the Language Proficiency Team team will then determine if the child should be referred and evaluated for appropriate services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 CEP 56  There are several data patterns that have emerged across the performance levels and grades on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. First, students entering the school system for the first time have made substantial and consistent progress in English language acquisition. A second pattern is that students have generally made a consistent rise up the ladder of proficiency levels across the grades. A third pattern is that although our students have generally improved from year to year, many still are not able to reach fully proficiency. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Representatives of the Language Proficiency Team meet with grade teams to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to the program. Weekly PD sessions are utilized to familiarize teachers with techniques for improved vocabulary instruction, direct language instruction, etc. Inquiry Teams for each grade focus on the achievement of ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program in P.S. 164 is taught by three licensed instructors. It features a blended model of instruction, incorporating both integrated and stand-alone programs. We tailor our program to best meet the needs of our students. Our ENL teachers pull students out of the classroom to provide small group instruction in stand-alone classes. Our ENL teachers push-in to provide additional support in the classroom in integrated classes. Our stand-alone classes are homogenous so that instruction can be tailored to meet each child’s individual needs. Our integrated classes are more heterogeneous, with the ENL teacher using a variety of approaches to help different students succeed in their classroom environment. The school follows student guidelines for determining the number of periods per week that each ELL is served, including the mandated minutes in integrated and/or stand-alone ENL programs. Beginners receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 180 minutes of stand-alone each week. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and at least 90 minutes of weekly stand-alone, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated ENL, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Advanced students receive 180 minutes of weekly integrated ENL services. Proficient students who have passed the NYSESLAT within two years receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated services. Integrated services are provided during ENL/ELA lessons. The principal and ENL coordinator meet in September to ensure that all ELLs are scheduled for the appropriate amount of service. In addition to daily ENL classes, our English Language Learners receive specialized instruction in the classroom. Our classroom teachers receive regular staff development on incorporating ENL principles and practices in the classroom. Classroom teachers focus on providing academic vocabulary and language objectives into their lessons to enable their ELLs to participate in all Common Core activities in the classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Mandarin Bilingual Program is available for students in grades K and 1. Each class is taught by a licenced Mandarin Bilingual Instructor. Entering students receive 75% of their instruction in Mandarin, emerging students receive 60% of their instruction in Mandarin, transitioning students receive 50% of their instruction in Mandarin and expanding students receive 25% of their instruction in Mandarin. ENL services are provided by the Mandarin Bilingual instructor. The school follows student guidelines for determining the number of periods per week that each ELL is served, including the mandated minutes in integrated and/or stand-alone ENL programs. Beginners receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 180 minutes of stand-alone each week. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and at least 90 minutes of weekly stand-alone, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated ENL, with the other 90 minutes flexible, 2018-19 CEP 57  depending on student needs. Advanced students receive 180 minutes of weekly integrated ENL services. Proficient students who have passed the NYSESLAT within two years receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated services. Integrated services are provided during ENL/ELA lessons. The principal and ENL coordinator meet in September to ensure that all ELLs are scheduled for the appropriate amount of service. In addition to daily ENL classes, our English Language Learners receive specialized instruction in the classroom. Our classroom teachers receive regular staff development on incorporating ENL principles and practices in the classroom. Classroom teachers focus on providing academic vocabulary and language objectives into their lessons to enable their ELLs to participate in all Common Core activities in the classroom. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school follows student guidelines for determining the number of periods per week that each ELL is served, including the mandated minutes in integrated and/or stand-alone ENL programs. Entering receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 180 minutes of stand-alone each week. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and at least 90 minutes of weekly stand-alone, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated ENL, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of weekly integrated ENL services. Commanding students who have passed the NYSESLAT within two years receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated services. Entering and Emerging students receive ENL/ELA instruction during their integrated sessions. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding students may receive content-area instruction during integrated sessions. The determination of which subject matter is to be covered during integrated sessions for these students will be made by the classroom teachers in collaboration with the ENL teacher, based on student learning needs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school is committed to meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELLs are expected to read, interpret and analyze a variety of grade-appropriate complex texts across each content area. P.S. 164 has a variety of targeting intervention programs to meet in the needs of ELLs, both in ELA and in the content areas. Our school maintains an intense focus on content-area ENL lessons. Our ENL teachers incorporate Social Studies and Science themes into their study units, combining language learning with content-area instruction. Our science and social studies cluster teachers will use ENL techniques and hands-on learning to introduce new concepts to English Language learners. Our math cluster provides small-group support to ELLs to enhance the acquisition of math vocabulary and concepts. Classroom teachers provide content-area instruction with the awareness that, for ENL students, two lessons are being learned at once: a set of new concepts and a set of new words and phrases to describe the concepts. Teachers are receiving extensive staff development on building ELL academic vocabulary, engaging ELLs with high-order questioning, incorporating language objectives into lessons and utilizing writing as a means for developing a deep comprehension of complex texts. ELLs are expected to participate fully in all classroom activities with instruction scaffolded to meet their learning needs. Materials used for the ENL programs include the On Our Way to English Kit by Rigby, the Scott Foresman ESL texts, leveled trade books and teacher-made texts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that all ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, our school’s testing coordinator meets with the ENL coordinator in November to determine which children would benefit from standardized testing in the native language. Classroom teachers, ENL teachers and administrators will meet with students in grades 3-5 to jointly decide if these children would benefit from a translated test and/or testing with an interpretter. Factors determining this decision include: the child’s proficiency in native language literacy, years of schooling in the native country and the child’s knowledge of content-area terms in the native language. If it is determined that a child will benefit from a translated test, the classroom teacher will be provided with the materials (glossary, native language texts) that will help the child prepare for this testing. 2018-19 CEP 58  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are children in dire need, and are therefore a priority for our school. We meet their needs in a variety of ways. First, of course, these children will receive 360 minutes of weekly ENL services. Second, they will receive daily Academic Intervention Services from the SETSS teacher. In addition, these students will be invited to all after school programs and other extra curricular activities. The administration will focus on these students during one to one conversations with teachers and offer instructional strategies to meet the needs of these specific children. The teacher will be offered additional support by the literacy coach and/or the ENL Coordinator. This support may include: suggested texts for literacy or the content areas, strategies for vocabulary enhancement and coaching sessions.b. The newcomers to P.S. 164 receive the services they require to meet their academic needs. Students who score at the beginning and intermediate levels of the LAB-R receive 360 minutes of weekly ENL instruction, in addition to 180 minutes of weekly English Languages Arts instruction. Students who score at the advanced level receive 180 minutes of weekly ENL instruction, in addition to 180 minutes of weekly ELA instruction. Our staff is focused on meeting the emotional needs of newly arrived students as well. We strive to create a multicultural community where all students feel welcome and ready to learn. For children who show signs of difficulty in adapting to a new culture, our guidance counselor and school-based support team offer counseling sessions and other appropriate interventions. We make every effort to involve the parents of newly arrived ELLs in the school community. Our parent orientation sessions provide parents with detailed information on citywide ENL and bilingual programs. We translate all key notices into the home language and make translators available for parent-teacher conferences. Our Parent Coordinator is always available to assist parents of newly arrived ELLs, offering information and advice on matters pertaining to both the school community and the broader community outside. Our instructional plan for newcomers is designed to help these children meet the state ELA standards, as measured by the state test. In order to rapidly build a rich background in English literarcy, we offer the kind of structured, explicit vocabulary instruction demonstrated in the book "Bringing Words to Life" (Beck, McKeown and Kukan). Newcomers are explicitly taught high order thinking skills—summarization, sequencing, character analysis and finding the main idea—in a manner that is appropriate to their proficiency level. c. Our students who require service from 4 to 6 years are children who require additional help in reading and writing. Our NYSESLAT scores indicate that these children are quite proficient in listening and speaking, but have difficulty with reading comprehension and essay writing. Therefore, our ENL instruction targets these areas. A key aspect of instruction is vocabulary acquisition. We offer the kind of structured, explicit vocabulary instruction demonstrated in the book "Bringing Words to Life" (Beck, McKeown and Kukan). In addition, we focus on reading skills such as summarization, sequencing, character analysis and finding the main idea—high order thinking skills that will enable these children to use the English language as a tool for thinking and deep understanding. Writing instruction encourages students to demonstrate rich, ordered, complex thinking--progressing from sentences to paragraphs to essays. Our math cluster provides small-group interventions to facilitate the acquisition of academic language in mathematics. The school will build on the results of this action research to improve instruction for ELLs across the school. Many experts and officials have conceded that one of the most challenging leaps in English Language Learning is for intermediate and advanced students in upper grade classrooms to succeed in grade-level literacy lessons. P.S. 164 hopes to be in the forefront of schools attempting to bridge this gap.d. Our long-term ELLs have generally fallen into two groups: students who need to improve their reading skills and children who have special needs. For the first group, our focus is to improve reading skills, both during mandated ESL periods and in the classroom. We offer integrated push-in ENL services, when possible, to enable students to receive instructional support during classroom literacy activities. Our long-term ELLs receive instruction that focuses on building high-order reading skills. During both the literacy block and ENL lessons, these students receive small-group instruction to help them build reading-comprehension skills. If necessary, our literacy and math coaches provide additional small-group interventions. e. Former ELLs will receive their state-mandated 90 minutes of weekly ENL services in the classroom as provided by a licensed ENL instructor. 2018-19 CEP 59  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For students with special needs, our school follows the mandates of each child’s IEP. Our ELL-SWDs come with a great variety of needs and we modify our instruction accordingly. To meet the language needs of these children, ENL services are provided according to state mandates. The school follows student guidelines for determining the number of periods per week that each ELL is served, including the mandated minutes in integrated and/or stand-alone ENL programs. Entering students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 180 minutes of stand-alone each week. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and at least 90 minutes of weekly stand-alone, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated ENL, with the other 90 minutes flexible, depending on student needs. Advanced students receive 180 minutes of weekly integrated ENL services. Commanding students who have passed the NYSESLAT within two years receive 90 minutes of weekly integrated services. Integrated services are provided during ENL/ELA lessons. In the classroom, vocabulary-rich scaffolded instruction is designed to both enrich language learning and enhance understanding in the content areas. Materials include Words Their Way, Fundations and Sundance Comprehension Strategy Kits for upper grades. Our Ells and Students with Disabilities build phonics skills on the Starfall website and build comprehension skills on the Raz Kids website. Bilingual literary resources include a collection of Spanish, Bangla and Chinese books available in the school library, and glossaries available from the ENL coordinator. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school has a flexible approach to meeting the needs of our ELL-SWDs, modifying the curriculum according to student IEPs and providing services in the least restrictive environment. The majority of ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed with other ELLs who are at the same grade and proficiency levels. These children are provided with scaffolded writing instruction to enable them to match their mainstream peers in clear, organized writing. Additionally, they are given the vocabulary and language supports needed to engage grade-appropriate complex texts with a high level of comprehension. ELL-SWDs are always placed in groups to meet their educational needs. For instance, one fifth-grade student with severe language delays has been placed in an ENL group that is focusing on oral language skills. ELL-SWDs are included in all ELL-based after-school programs, such as NYSESLAT test prep. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We target Entering and Emerging ELLs for intervention programs in ELA, Math and other core content areas, concentrating on students who have been in the school for a full year and are still three or more levels below the expected reading level on their grade. Our AIS providers and SETTS teachers work with small groups of ELLs who require targeted instruction in phonics and other decoding skills, mathematical vocabulary, problem solving, etc... Our Chinese, Spanish and Bengali- speaking paraprofessionals provide small-group instructional sessions for newly-arrived ELLs who require support in content areas such as science, math or social studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Following the new state guidelines, ENL teachers will be collaborating more frequently with classroom teachers to provide direct instruction to ELLs in the classroom. ENL teachers will implement techniques such as pre teaching of vocabulary and embedding language objectives to facilitate high order learning for ELLs in such subject areas as ELA, Science, Social Studies and Math. Lessons will involve team teaching, small group instruction and individual instruction, as necessary. These integrated teaching sessions will also serve as professional development opportunities for both classroom and ENL teachers. Classroom teachers will acquire techniques to be utilized with their ELLs during the entire school day. ENL teachers will acquire strategies for engaging students with complex texts across a variety of grades and curricula. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 CEP 60  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENL students in P.S. 164 receive equal access to all school programs. Our after-school test preparation classes (social studies, science, math and ELA) are open to all children on the appropriate grade levels. Parents are provided with written notices about after school programs in their home native language. During these classes, teachers modify the instruction (vocabulary front-loading, language objectives) to meet our students learning needs. All children make regularly scheduled visits to our Robin Hood library and our computer lab, as determined by the prep schedule. The library offers a variety of bilingual books, in languages such as Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Chinese and Russian. We offer NYSESLAT preparation classes for our ENL students in the winter. All of our required and supplemental services correspond to our ENL students age and grade levels. Our district offers a summer-school class for entering, emerging or transitioning ENL students, providing them with additional support before the next school year begins. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are a wide variety of instructional materials that support the learning of our ENL students. Our ENL classroom has a large collection of leveled books designed to support literacy at each grade level, as well as content-area instruction in science and social studies. The school's Robin Hood library has a bilingual section with books in a variety of languages, including Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Vietnamese and Bengali. These books are picture books and trade books appropriate for independent reading. Students have access to bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. ENL students have full access to the school's computer lab and most classrooms, including the ENL room, have a Promethean Board. This piece of technology has proven a vital tool for language learning--enabling interactive lessons featuring video, music and text. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Language Support is provided for our ENL students by both classroom teachers and paraprofessionals. Mandarin Bilingual Teachers service students in grades k and 1. For other students, blingual paraprofessionals provide instructional support in the content areas in Chinese, Spanish and Bengali. Classroom teachers provide native language instructional support in Mandarin, Spanish and Russian as needed. The majority of this support is in interpretting and expanding upon the lessons in English language materials. For newly-arrived entering students, there may also be reading and discussing of the bilingual picture and trade books from the school library. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services, support and resources correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels. ENL groups contain students of no more than two contiguous grade levels and mostly are comprised of one single grade level. In general, intermediate and advanced groups will be one grade level. Sometimes beginning groups need to contain children of two grade levels, depending on the enrollment of students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There are a wide variety of instructional materials that support the learning of our ELLs. Our ENL classroom has a large collection of leveled books designed to support literacy at each grade level, as well as content-area instruction in science and social studies. The school's Robin Hood library has a bilingual section with books in a variety of languages, including Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Vietnamese and Bengali. These books are picture books and trade books appropriate for independent reading. Students have access to bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. ENL students have full access to the school's computer lab and all classrooms, including the ENL room, have a Promethean Board or Smart Board. This piece of technology has proven to be a vital tool for language learning--enabling interactive lessons featuring video, music and text. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 61  We offer orientation meetings with our ENL teachers, parent coordinator and guidance counselor for new families/parents. We also offer beginner groups to new ELL students to orient them to the school building. We host a welcome breakfast/meet an greet for new parents with the ENL teachers, Administrators and Parent Coordinator. Our school district offers ENL classes during summer school to support newly arrived ELLs before the start of a given school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no foreign language classes offered in PS 164. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There will be school-wide professional development in Reading and Writing for ELLs provided during the school year by district staff developers. There will be three areas of focus for improving ELL writing skills: vocabulary acquisition, reading comprehension and oral language development. Topics will include: high-order questioning, vocabulary acquisition, incorporating grade-appropriate complex texts in ENL lessons and Writing Across the Curriculum for ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Parent Coordinator works with students and their families to facilitate the process of transitioning from elementary school to middle school. We offer parent workshops for families/parents as well as assist parents with Tours of Middle Schools. The principal maintains a record of all ELL training sessions in her office. Training is provided by both District Staff Developers and the ENL teachers in the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual conferences are scheduled during weekly parent involvement sessions on Tuesday afternoons. Interpreters are available in Spanish, Russian, Chinese and Bangla as needed. If other languages are necessary, the teacher contacts the city Interpretation unit for assistance. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are an integral part of the community at P.S. 164. During monthly Parent Association meetings, parents are invited to discuss their needs and concerns. Interpreters are provided in a variety of languages, including Spanish, Russian and 2018-19 CEP 62  Bengali. Our Parent Coordinator organizes a series of classes and workshops for our parents, including an adult ENL workshop that meets twice a week in the Family Room. The Parent Coordinator is also present at our ELL Parent Orientation Workshops to help address any needs or concerns. Parents are invited to use our newly remodeled Robin Hood library. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Erica Steinberg, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Caesar Rodney School DBN: 20K164 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Erica Steinberg Title Principal Melissa Jamieson Assistant Principal Solange Cisneros Steinert Parent Coordinator Craig Fishbane ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sinai Lazaro Elena Levin Parent Teacher/Subject Area Annie Gallagher Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Patricia Mulhall School Counselor Karina Costantino Jo Ann Benoit Jan Shperling Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Assistant Principal Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/6/15 11/6/15 11/6/15 11/6/15 11/6/15 11/6/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 11/6/15 11/6/15 06/26/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K164 School Name: Caesar Rodney Superintendent: KarinaCostanti The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Solange Lauren Cisneros Steinert Parent Coordinator Coyle ENL Teacher No NO Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each parent fills out a home language survey when a child enters the school. On that survey, the parent indicates the preferred language for communication with the school. To make certain that our information regarding interpretation and translation needs are up-to-date, questionnaires are sent out to all parents in the school each fall, asking parents to indicate which languages were spoken at home and which languages were preferred for all written communication from the school. The results of these questionnaires are tabulated so the school has a record of all languages necessary for translation, both in written and oral form. Each teacher is given a breakdown of the home languages of his/her class. In addition to these Parent Surveys, the school also consults the ATS Report of Preferred Languages. The principal and the pupil accounting secretary will maintain master copies of the school-wide home language breakdown. The school sends out the questionnaires to the parents of English-2018-19 CEP 66  proficient students as well as ELLs, since an English-proficient child may still have parents who are not proficient in the English language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese Moldavian Mandarin English Polish Quiche Russian Slovak Spanish Tigre Tadzhik Urdu Ukraine Uzbek Wolof 8 113 200 0 0 261 7 0 32 1 314 0 8 4 0 13 1 .83 11.73 20.77 0 0 27.1 .73 0 3.32 .1 32.61 0 .83 .42 0 1.35 .1 8 113 141 0 54 262 6 0 30 1 314 0 9 4 1 13 1 .83 11. 14.6 0 5.61 27.21 .62 0 3.12 .1 32.61 0 .93 .42 .1 1.35 .1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 67  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual Handbooks/Welcome Packet/School Calendar August & September NYC DOE Translation Services Monthly Newsletters 1st of Every Month Parent Teacher Conference Announcements/Curriculum Information September November March May After School Program Information Ongoing throughout the year Staff or NYC DOE Translation Services Staff or NYC DOE Translation Services Staff or NYC DOE Translation Services New York State Testing Dates September Welcome Packet and Ongoing Throughout the Year Staff or NYC DOE Translation Services Letters from Administration & School Leadership Team Ongoing Throughout the Year Letters from Teachers Ongoing Throughout the Year Staff or NYC DOE Translation Services Staff or NYC DOE Translation Services N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? There are four parent -teacher conferences scheduled for each school year plus promotional meetings. September November January March May We have paraprofessionals and staff that translate for families. We also formed a partnership with FDR High School and have translators when needed. There are fifty minutes of Parent Involvement time scheduled for each Tuesday afternoon. Teachers Every Tuesday throughout the School Year Teachers and paraprofessionals within the building translate. 2018-19 CEP 68  use this time for both phone and in-person conferences with parents, as well as parent workshops. There are IEP meetings for Students with Disabilities. Throughout the School Year Teachers and paraprofessionals within the building translate. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We always have staff available to translate via phone, email or paper. We also use School CNXT which is an app that we can send out messages to parents/families and is translated in any language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff are provided with Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 at our welcome back PD. Staff are also provide with contact information with translation services as well as a list of paraprofessionals that are available to assist with translations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator distributes a copy of the Parent’s Bill of Rights and Responsibilities to all parents who are speakers of covered languages at the beginning of each school year (or within ten days of a child’s registration in our school if that child registers mid-year). Signs are posted in the main office in the covered languages to indicate available translation and interpretation services. As indicated in the school safety plan, the school has a variety of interpreters available in Spanish, Chinese, Bengali and Russian to ensure that no parent is denied access to the administration. In the event of a parent needing to communicate in a language where no interpreter/translator is available, the school contacts the Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. Whenever ten percent of our students have a home language that is not covered, we will arrange for translations of the Parent’s Bill of Rights and Responsibilities and other vital communications by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 69  The school utilizes the annual parent survey to determine what needs our parents have and to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator regularly canvasses parents during PTA meetings to determine how well their needs are being met. The principal and assistant principal invite parents for Town Hall meetings to discuss both their satisfactions with and their concerns about the school on an ongoing basis. 2018-19 CEP 70 
