2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K171 School Name: I.S. 171 ABRAHAM LINCOLN Principal: INDIRA MOTA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Abraham Lincoln Intermediate School 331900010171 School Number (DBN): 19K171 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-8 School Address: 528 Ridgewood Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11208 Phone Number: 718-647-0111 Fax: 718-827-5834 School Contact Person: Ms. Mota Email Address: IMota2@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Mota Ms. Perez Ms. Cevallos Ms. Perez N/A N/A Ms. Shalina Akoko District Information Geographical District: 19 Superintendent: Dr. McBryde Superintendent’s Office Address: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 Superintendent’s Email Address: TMcbrydeJr@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-240-2700 Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: 718-240-2751 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Ms. Fitzgerald 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn , NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-3352 Fax: 718-935-2337 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Indira Mota Mercedes Perez Karina Cevallos Ms. Johnson Angela Rivera N/A N/A Shalina Akoko Lilliam Lopez Isaura Cesario Genea Adeniji Martha De La Cruz Ismataria Cavaliere Joanne Reyes *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ PTA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosa De La Cruz Gabriela Miran N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Statement is: We believe at Abraham Lincoln Intermediate School 171, that we are a community of educators dedicated to the idea that every child can learn and is entitled to a high quality education. We will instill in all children a sense of positive self-esteem, motivation, and empowerment that will enable them to achieve academically as they move on to higher education. Vision Statement: As educators, we will develop a learning community, in collaboration with parents, is committed to providing the highest quality of education to all of our students and become a beacon of excellence in the community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Abraham Lincoln Intermediate School (I.S. 171) is a 6-8 grade middle school located in the Cypress Hills, Brooklyn area of District 19 with a total student enrollment of 449 students. The school community is home to a predominantly Hispanic population, comprising of 77% of the students. Additionally, the population of IS 171 is comprised of students who identify as Asian (4%), African American (14%), and White (1%). IS 171 is home to the city's pilot Middle School Student Success Center where students and families alike are provided with in depth counseling about the high school choice process. We are in our fifth year of this program and student high school matches continue to increase. There are a number of students that have been selected for specialized high schools and preparatory art schools year after year. Our Community Based Organization, Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation (CHLDC), provides after school enrichment at no cost to families. In after school, students receive homework help, participate in service learning activities, an art program that includes photography, dance, visual arts, drama and guitar. Students can also participate in classes for coding and robotics, as well as sports like baseball and basketball. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school welcomes newcomers each year and our ELL population remains steady at 23% of the total population. The majority of our students and families are identified as economically disadvantaged (Economic Need Index of 76% - surpassing the city average of 62%). Of our 449 students, 21% are students with disabilities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The framework elements we plan to address in the following year are rigorous instruction and strong-family ties. This year we will focus on higher order thinking questions across content areas, introduce new curriculum in social studies, and ELL programs, as well as focus on data analysis meetings to identify gaps in instruction and support re-teaching opportunities. We will continue efforts in ELA that have lead to increases in average proficiency and will focus on our Math instruction where our school's average proficiency fell in 2017. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. One USDE Turnaround Principle that will be utilized during the 2018-2019 school year is time allotted for teachers to collaborate on the use of data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K171 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 444 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 47 14 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 94.6% % Reduced Lunch 26.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 81.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.75 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 37 37 6 93.2% 3.6% 18.7% 8.3% 7.2% 2.0% 4 15% 6.9 15.2% 37% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the area of 3.5, in order for the school to move to the Effective rating we have organized and implemented a plan to strengthen our analysis and evaluation of formative and summative assessments. This is critical to ensure consistency between curriculum and assessments across grades and departments and to allow teachers to provide targeted and data-based feedback to address all students’ next steps. We utilized our professional learning time to work with staff in using data to identify strategies that are successful with student groups. All students take a series of Baseline Assessments that provide both ELA and Math data, from which item analyses are created and analyzed by staff at department and grade meetings alike. By supporting the use of the baseline assessments and collection of data, teachers provide ongoing feedback to our students on both scale score results and amount of growth and improvement attained. By having students understand the significance of the results of the baseline assessments, we are instilling a culture of academic maturity, integrity and consistent self-evaluation. The data collected inform teacher planning and preparation in order to meet the needs of all of our learners. All administrators collectively have learning and observation walks in order to better ‘norm’ our observation protocols. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  By June, 2019, 90% of teachers will utilize complex text with students to ensure that they can respond to DOK level 3 and 4 questions. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our research-based systems and structures are based on the work of Love (2012), Fullan (2012) and Dweck (2010). This research guided our data action plan that supports all learners with differentiated strategies and provided teachers with the professional learning that is needed to accomplish the outcomes for all students. All teachers complete and implement a school-wide system for using data. A process has been developed to adapt curriculum that supports all student subgroups. One adaptation to the curriculum has been the use of computer software this year that is targeting mathematics to low performing students, ICT students, ENL students and self-contained students: Mathletics and ST Math. An assessment calendar has been created and all teachers have been trained in understanding baseline data, and the creation of targets and goals as well analyzing item analysis charts with student results. Teachers use pre and post formative and summative assessments across grades and content areas assuring alignment between the curriculum and assessment tools. In addition to the SLT, all parents are given opportunities to receive trainings in the academic work of their children as well as ample celebrations and honor ceremonies. Every Tuesday from 2:30pm to 3:15pm, teachers have open office hours for parents, where they can come in and speak to the teachers about their child’s performance. In addition, there are opportunities for parents to be trained and receive additional information on Pupil Path from Skedula which is the program we are using to track student performance and inform parents of student progress. Trust is built through the continual collaboration and inclusion of all stakeholders. We have implemented a professional learning committee and include key staff in our leadership planning meetings. We have an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone's perspective. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students and all teachers August, 2018 through June, 2019 Principal, Asst. Principals, Lead teachers All students August, 2018 through June, 2019 All school leaders and all teachers All parents and all care-givers August, 2018 through June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator All stakeholders August, 2018 through June, 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support our families' understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core Learning Standards through monthly parent meetings where they will be given training and information on the learning standards and how they affect their children at school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Borough Support Field Office budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. We will also be allocating funds for educational software such as Mathletics and ST Math for our low performing students in mathematics as well additional purchases of labtops, ELMO's for classroom instruction and teacher supplies for instruction. In an effort to create a more student centered classroom, equipment such as ELMO's, labtops as mentioned earlier will facilitate student learning and academic growth. Additionally we access Leadership support through the use of curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. -Identification of parental resources Tax Levy X Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Improved performance of identified subgroups as evidenced by interim assessments Mid-point progress monitoring activities will take place in January, 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula/Pupil Path/Ed Performance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a result of the need for socio-emotional intervention with some of our students beyond what is already offered, teachers conduct academic/socio-emotional collegial inquiry groups. Thus, the school has developed a system to connect structures and systems currently in place so that key information on social and emotional developmental health for all students is collected and analyzed to promote academic success. The students identified for such intervention are then referred to our Brain Boosters program that is conducted by our licensed Social Worker and Psychologist after school twice a week. Additional members of the school community will also be invited to take part in the inquiry cycle, included but not limited to parents and members of our School Based Support Team. Our school community currently utilizes Datacation in order to collect and track our students’ social, emotional, and academic goals which will all lead to sustained academic achievement and improvements Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  By June, 2019 every student will have be provided with individualized support by a paraprofessional, teacher, Middle School Student Success Center counselor and other support staff in order to increase their ownership of learning and college and career preparedness. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school leader has selected the research-based program Brain Boosters Program which promotes student social emotional health and wellness. The principal and assistant principal have developed a professional learning opportunity to collect and gather information and data of students that could possibly be referred to the program. for all staff to understand and implement the program. - The school uses differentiated instructional strategies in all classrooms to support the needs of all learners in all subgroups. -The school community has a plan in place to monitor student social and emotional health needs which is based on data. -All stakeholders have a role and responsibility that is connected to the development and progress of a specific group of students Parents are informed of their child’s success through Pupil Path on Skedula which offers a 24 hour reporting system to parents. Teacher anecdotals and comments are uploaded onto the system for all members of the family to view. Parents are also being invited to our monthly PTA meetings so they can take part in our community events and activities that are planned for all of our families. Trust is built through the continual collaboration and inclusion of all stakeholders. We have implemented a professional learning committee, who also include key staff in our leadership planning meetings. We have an open-door policy for all staff and families that allows for reciprocal communication, problem-solving, and respect for everyone’s perspective. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students and staff August, 2018-June, 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals All students August, 2018 June, 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals All parents August, 2018-June, 2019 School leaders and Parent Coordinator All stakeholders August, 2018-June, 2019 Principal and APs August, 2016-June, 2017 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support our families' understanding of Supportive Environments through monthly parent meetings where they will be given training and information on the learning standards and how they affect their children at school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Borough Support Field Office budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. We will also be allocating funds for educational software such as Mathletics and ST Math for our low performing students in mathematics as well additional purchases of labtops, ELMO's for classroom instruction and teacher supplies for instruction. In an effort to create a more student centered classroom, equipment such as ELMO's, labtops as mentioned earlier will facilitate student learning and academic growth. Additionally we access Leadership support in the use curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. -Identification of parental resources Tax Levy X Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every staff member has a student for whom they monitor their social and emotional progress using a data system. Every parent has received timely progress reports as well report cards that include all students’ levels on benchmarks as well as state exams. Mid-point progress monitoring activities will take place in January, 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula/Pupil Path/Ed Performance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have developed a professional learning plan that is focused on developing the instructional practices that lead to high levels of student engagement which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Unit and lesson plans will include critical thinking skills and challenging learning tasks that are developed to meet the needs of all learners. Teachers have also been trained in using formative and summative assessments to inform instructional decision making. One area of improvement that will be of focus during professional learning sessions will be the creation of multiple entry points that will meet the needs of our different learners, incorporated into teacher planning and practice. Specifically, these students include those in special education, English language learners and those who have also been identified as in need of additional interventions and academic supports. All teachers participate in an Academic Inquiry Protocol where teachers meet to align tasks, gaps, adjust curriculum, use findings to revise instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  By June, 2019, 100% of teachers will plan together to ensure that there is cohesion of instruction that is aligned to CCLS. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We utilize the Danielson Framework (2000) to measure teacher effectiveness. We have created and implemented a differentiated professional learning plan based on the NYC Chancellor’s Professional Learning Handbook (2014) The school leaders have developed a timely plan for cycles of observation and feedback to teachers. School leaders call upon the Network for support in intended learning for school leaders and staff including on-site support and job-embedded training. Teacher teams have been trained in Looking at Student Work Protocols. All teachers have been trained in Datacation which ensures that a data system to track the progress of all students is in place to guide student needs and keep parents informed. The school uses differentiated instructional strategies in all classrooms to support the needs of all learners in all subgroups. Teachers receive trainings in creating multiple entry points in lessons, creating higher order questions and critical thinking tasks, and text complexity work. Parents are given weekly opportunity to visit with their child’s teachers given the new time allotted by the NYC DOE. In addition, we communicate daily with parents in all matters of instruction that concern the academic progress of their child. We also send home newsletters, provide parental trainings, and give parents access to our student data system. The school provides multiple entry points for teachers to participate in learning opportunities to understand effective instructional practices. This respects the learning and wants and needs of all teachers. Further, we ground our work in research-based theory and practices that ensure professional coherence and build trust and professionalism among our faculty. We have a professional learning committee made up of teachers and school leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers August, Principal and APs 2018 -June, 2019 All teachers August, Principal and APs 2018 -June, 2019 All parents September, 2018-June, 2019 Principal and school leaders, teachers, Parent Coor. All stakeholders August, 2018-June, 2019 Principal and APs 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support our families' understanding of Parent Collaboration with Teachers through monthly parent meetings where they will be given training and information on the learning standards and how they affect their children at school. We will seek out parent advocacy groups that will present to the parents and share out strategies and ideas on how to collaborate with their child's teachers in order to increase their academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Borough Field Support Office budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities. We will also be allocating funds for educational software such as Mathletics and ST Math for our low performing students in mathematics as well additional purchases of labtops, ELMO's for classroom instruction and teacher supplies for instruction. In an effort to create a more student centered classroom, equipment such as ELMO's, labtops as mentioned earlier will facilitate student learning and academic growth. Additionally we access Leadership support in the use curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. -Identification of parental resources Tax Levy X Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, a review of student work and results of the 2nd Interim Assessment will be conducted by school leaders and staff to identify academic progress and growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula/Pupil Path/Ed Performance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Elmore’s (2000) five principles of distributive leadership is the research based model used to guide our vision of effective leadership work. Elmore believes that distributed leadership plays a role in generating instructional improvement (Lashway 2003). Distributive leadership maintains that instructional improvement is now the measure of leadership success. The instructional process must be guided, rather than controlled by administrators. All the leadership must be organized around a common task and shared common values. Creating this unity is the principal’s core responsibility. Thus, the research based instructional activities used to support our school has been selected based on the premise that when school leaders focus strategic and shared efforts around student outcomes they create an environment that allows all students to achieve. Professional Learning Communities (PLC’s) (DuFour & Eaker, 1998) further bolster and guide leadership efforts in our school. Specifically, the school leaders work with all stakeholders in creating a collaborative community of learners. The school leaders leverages both human and financial resources that serve all students in order to provide a safe learning environment and a culture that supports teaching and learning. We will continue to support our research based focus this year using the work of Bambrick-Santoyo (2014) to guide our data and leadership process. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Recent review by the district indicated: The Principal maintains a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to the entire school community. Teachers participate on on-site and off-site professional learning opportunities, turn key information learned and schedule inter-visitation with their colleagues to improve their practice. Parents stated that they are invited to participate in learning content workshops and are extremely satisfied with the academic and social emotional support students are provided by the principal and teachers. Recommendations included: Strengthen teacher’s use of formative assessments including checks for understanding so that teachers make ongoing instructional adaptations and use assessments to inform instruction on a consistent basis. Provide professional development with your instructional team to develop a common understanding of common and formative assessment to be used across classrooms and subjects to inform instruction for small grouping. The present observation process had been strengthened through a collaborative approach between the Principal and Asst. Principals who now meet regularly to calibrate around the Danielson rubric. A professional learning plan has been developed based on the results in ADVANCE and the principal and school leaders monitor teacher effectiveness on a regular basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will be provided concrete professional learning opportunities to demonstrate progress in at least one area of observable teaching practices using the Danielson Framework (2012). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers September, 2018 June, 2019 Principals and APs All students September, 2018 -June, 2019 Principals and APs All parents September, 2018 -June, 2019 Principal, Parent Coor. All stakeholders Aug, 2018-June, 2019 Principals and APs Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We utilize the Danielson Framework (2012) to measure teacher effectiveness. Teachers meet with the Principal to develop goals and discuss their individualized professional learning plan. We have created and implemented a differentiated professional learning plan based on the NYC Chancellor’s Professional Learning Handbook (2014) The school leaders have developed a timely plan for cycles of observation and feedback to teachers. School leaders call upon the Network for support in intended learning for school leaders and staff including on-site support and job-embedded training. The school uses differentiated instructional strategies in all classrooms to support the needs of all learners in all subgroups. Teachers receive trainings in creating multiple entry points in lessons, creating higher order questions and critical thinking tasks, and text complexity work Parents are given weekly opportunity to visit with their child’s teachers given the new time allotted by the NYC DOE. In addition, we communicate daily with parents in all matters of instruction that concern the academic progress of their child. We also send home newsletters, provide parental trainings, and give parents access to our student data system. As of June, 2015, families will also receive their account information for their NYC DOE Family Accounts. The principal has a transparent process to engage all stakeholders in setting goals and making strategic decisions regarding human, fiscal, and program processes. , We ground our work in research-based theory and practices that ensure professional coherence and build trust and professionalism among our faculty. We have a professional learning committee made up of teachers and school leaders. All stakeholders are included in decision making, planning and creating opportunities for learning, and celebrations of our success. We continually use data to inform all stakeholders and this ensures a coherent method of clarity and accuracy. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support our families' understanding of Effective School Leadership and how they can work with school administration through monthly parent meetings where they will be given training and information on the learning standards and how they affect their children at school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Network budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities.We will also be allocating funds for educational software such as Mathletics and ST Math for our low performing students in mathematics as well additional purchases of labtops, ELMO's for classroom instruction and teacher supplies for instruction. In an effort to create a more student centered classroom, equipment such as ELMO's, labtops as mentioned earlier will facilitate student learning and academic growth. Team practices as well as: - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. -Identification of parental resources Additionally we access Leadership support in the use curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will have received classroom observations and timely feedback by December,2018. By January 2019, all teachers will have completed midyear conversation with the principal focused on their instructional practices and progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula/Pupil Path/Ed Performance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. X X 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. N/A 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During our academic school year we present many opportunities for our families to come and take part in our school wide events. Through ongoing collaboration and engagement, we will be able to continue the development of a shared vision of student learning and achievement at IS 171. In an effort to celebrate outstanding academic achievement, all families are invited for an Honor Roll Family Dinner. Families are also invited to our many school arts and cultural shows and assemblies as well learning opportunities put forth for the following: Parent IEP Informational Meetings, Title I School Parent Informational Meetings, Focus School Information Parent Meetings and Parent Meetings for Skedula and Pupil Path. Our Framework for Great School Reports indicates a score of 60 for Strong Family-Community Ties in Parent Involvement. The Citywide average is 66. We plan to target this area and continually improve upon our parent involvement practices as outlined in our action plan. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 the school will have an increase of 12% in parent attendance at teacher conferences and school engagement events with a focus on informing them of their child’s progress, as evidenced by parent attendance and sign-in sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents are offered the opportunity to take part in adult and parenting workshops offered in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator and CBO’s There are open office hours for parents to come in every Tuesday from 2:30pm to 3:15pm to meet with their child’s teachers There are monthly calendars that are backpacked home with students announcing all workshops and activities in the school community for the month. There is a culture of open communication and access instilled in our school community, where there is an open door policy for administrators, teachers and students. All teachers All parents and care-givers All parents September, 2018–June, 2019 September, 2018–June, 2019 September, 2018–June, 2019 Principals and APs Principals and APs Principal, APs, and Parent Coor. All stakeholders July, 2018-June, 2019 Principals and APs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Cypress Hills Community Based Organization will be helping IS 171 partner with our families and community throughout the academic school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning funds so that the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our Network budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff are assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher. Para per session to support instruction and extra- curricular activities.We will also be allocating funds for educational software such as Mathletics and ST Math for our low performing students in mathematics as well additional purchases of labtops, ELMO's for classroom instruction and teacher supplies for instruction. In an effort to create a more student centered classroom, equipment such as ELMO's, labtops as mentioned earlier will facilitate student learning and academic growth. Additionally we access Leadership support in the use curriculum planning programs and implementation of teacher team practices as well as: - On-site feedback given regularly to school leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  -Support in identification of research-based instructional strategies and planning teacher Professional Learning -Support in data access and continual for on-site, job-embedded opportunities for school leaders and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. -Identification of parental resources Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, a review of parent attendance totals from all conferences and events will be assessed in order to identify trends or patterns. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula/Pupil Path Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Focus Students between 1.85 and 1.99 Level Range Focus Students between 1.85 and 1.99 Level Range Focus Students between 1.85 and 1.99 Level Range Focus Students between 1.85 and 1.99 Level Range Focus Students between 1.85 and 1.99 Level Range Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Skill/Needs Based Enrichment Skill/Needs Based Enrichment Skill/Needs Based Enrichment Skill/Needs Based Enrichment Skill/Needs Based Enrichment Small group Small group Small group Small group Small group During and After School Hours During and After School Hours During and After School Hours During and After School Hours During and After School Hours 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 29 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor’s Regulation A-780 ensure that students residing in temporary living situations have access to the same public education and services that are available to permanently housed students. To ensure that all of our Students in Temporary Housing receive all proper and needed resources in addition to the regular academic program we have the following services in place: -dedicated guidance counselor(s) who are aware of students’ status and follow their academic and social-emotional progress/interact with families/regular check-ins on students -attendance incentives and celebrations -academic honor celebrations with families -full access to the after-school program and computers beyond the regular school program -we monitor their resources and provide needed supplies such as back-packs, uniforms, etc. -we work with the NYC DOE STH unit to identify best practices, health contacts, counseling services and professional services that our STH families may need as support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: To recruit teachers, we work closely with our Borough Support Field Office human resources, traditional teacher education programs, and alternative licensure programs. We have attended hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. We continue to work closely with our Human Resources to ensure that all required documentation and assessment deadlines are met. Retention and Support: In our efforts to retain highly qualified teachers and ensure they have the supports and strategies to grow professionally, we are highly invested in professional development. We offer professional development to teachers provided by other teachers, administrators, as well as support staff from our Superintendent and Borough Support Field Office. Mentoring is implemented as per teacher requirements. Non-tenured teachers are given opportunities to learn about the tenure process and our network provides support in this area. Teachers are provided with PL in instruction, classroom management, parental involvement, and all areas of data use. We believe in individualized professional development plans that are designed to focus on each teacher’s needs. Teachers are active participants in the process and collaborate with administrators to review their goals and monitor progress and development. Each teacher will develop an Individual Improvement Plan (IIP) mainly to move teachers toward highly-effective practice. The Danielson’s Framework for Teacher Effectiveness (2007) will is used as at to track areas of need and progress. Teachers self-assess on a regular basis and confer with school leaders. All professional development is research and evidence based. Research Based Strategies (RBIs) are emphasized in our trainings. Inter-visitations are encouraged for all teachers as well as participation in external professional development opportunities. Our instructional specialists support teacher retention by providing on-site job-embedded trainings, modeling, and teacher team development. We are committed to developing a culture for learning and celebrating the success of our teachers. To this end, we encourage team events, opportunities for external learning, and highlighting exemplary work. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional learning plan is guided by the NYC Chancellor’s Handbook for Professional Learning and provides for whole school and individual teacher support (August through June, ongoing). Although much of the training will be differentiated with to meet the specific needs of individual teachers as well as subjects, all staff members will receive 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  training and support in implementing the fo Preparing teachers in the use of data to inform instruction and understand the progress of all learners/subgroups • September roll out of systematic analysis of data collection, monitoring and teacher conferencing, January check in for progress evaluation, June assessment, reflection and next steps. October through June, on- going – teacher feedback sessions, October through June ongoing Looking at Student Work protocol implementation • Opportunities for differentiated professional development for staff members using the weekly allocated time as well as structured periods and events. • Prepare teaching staff in NYC CIEs, CCLS and Instructional Expectations (on-going). • Formal and informal cycles of observations will be conducted by school leaders using feedback and tracking progress September through June. • Identification of point personnel, lead teachers, to support colleagues • Principal and Assistant Principals provide workshops and teacher conferencing. Key personnel and other resources will include leadership, network support instructional leads and external consultants. • Targets to evaluate our progress, effectiveness and impact will include: By November 2012 Our Network will complete a full day instructional walk with school leaders. Report will be generated and shared with teachers. Professional development will be designed based on needs assessment from the instructional walk-through. • Visits from our network support group conducted as follow up in order to document progress. • Frequent cycles of informal and formal observation • Teacher mid-year, end-year evaluations and self-evaluation Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school has a MOSL committee where all teachers are represented and have a voice in the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures. Our school also has a Professional Learning Committee that meets on a regular basis 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  with the school leaders to plan, select, and assess the professional development needed to support assessment and improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 387,574.00 16,979.00 131,955.00 0 15,950.00 0 3,221,254.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. IS 171, Abraham Lincoln, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. IS 171, Abraham Lincoln will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41 Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template IS 171, Abraham Lincoln , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 5 3 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ENL teachers will utilize a variety of data and assessments to identify areas of focus for the ELL students in our school community. ELL students that are identified through this data will work with their grade ENL teacher to increase proficiency levels in 6th, 7th & 8th grades. Inside and other English-Spanish content specific texts will be utilized throughout the duration of the program. The ENL teachers use the NYSESLAT, state test scores, Spanish Lab and NYSITELL to identify the students for the program. They input the data into EDAT and are able to identify the students who need the most small group support. The program begins in October 2018 and runs through April 2019. There are approximately 35 students in the program who are grouped and serviced according to their language ability. They receive both Math instruction and ENL instruction. There are four certified teachers working with these students, 1 certified ENL teacher and 2 are certified bilingual teachers and 1 certified math teacher. The students are involved in book studies, grammar and vocabulary studies as well as using Ed performance online program to track student progress. They are also involved in math enrichment. Students in grades 6, 7 and 8 receive title III services. We use the NYSESLAT scores to identify the students for the after school program. Entering and emerging students work with Ms. Hildalgo during the after school program. Expanding and transitioning work with Ms. Depalo after school and all language ability levels work with Mr. Veras. Mr. Percheckley works with the long term ELL's. Students meet twice a week, Wednesdays and Thursdays, for 2:20pm - 4:30pm. There are three groups of students which consist of approximately 10 students per group mixed grades depending on language ability. The students rotate about every 30 minutes to ensure they each receive math instruction by the content teacher. The teachers are responsible for keeping accurate attendance records and making outreach to parents in the home language. We use pupil path, which is an online program that translates into all languages once the parent logs in. We use pupil path to communicate with the parents in their home language. If we require further translation we reach out to the translation unit. We service an ELL population, which comprises 23% of our student enrollment. We have freestanding ESL program as well as a TBE program. Through these programs, all of our ELLs receive the mandated hours of instruction. The newcomer is taught by a TESOL certified teacher. The class engages in activities in reading and math and utilizes Skill Sharpeners workbooks. The intermediate/advanced ELL group, engages in activities to prepare students for their NYSELAT, ELA and math exams, utilizes Annatansio and Associates NYSESLAT Prep books as well as Comprehension Plus workbooks. The group rotates between two teachers, one who provides math instruction, and the other who provides reading instruction. ELL students with special needs receive instruction from a certified special education teacher with a bilingual extension. Students use the Progress Coach reading and math workbooks. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The school's professional development plan that will support our Title III program teachers will include but are not limited to SIOP model instructional planning and implementation, DOE and Network ongoing professional development that will target ELL Instruction and use of resources and strategies gathered by Principal at ELL Literacy and Language Workshops. Professional Development is aligned with the Title III program that we are offering. All of our teachers working with ELLs receive professional development. In house professional development will be available to the Bilingual teachers, ESL teachers as well as teachers of ELLs. They will participate in study groups, which are provided weekly, and Grade conferences, which are provided monthly. Additionally, they will attend workshops that meet their needs, given by the district. The following is a tentative schedule of Professional Development activities. Working with CEI-PEA, we are additionally providing ongoing in-house professional development based on teacher Needs Assessments and Needs identified during the LAP development process. ELL Strategies for Content; Given By: Ms. Udo For: Teachers of Freestanding ESL, Content Area Tutorial Teachers of ELLs Use of Academic Language in Content Area Classrooms; Given By: Ms. Udo and ESL Teachers; For: Teachers of Freestanding ESL Content Area Classes; Mondays – Ongoing Preparing ELL Students for the ELA Exam; Given By: ELA Department; For: ESL/ELA Teachers/TBE Teachers; Spring 2019 Administering the NYSESLAT & Other Asesssments; Given By: Ms. Pena, Testing Coordinator; For: All Staff Administering NYSESLAT; Spring 2019 Assessing Data; Given By: Ms. Pena, Testing Coordinator, ESL Teachers and UFT Coach; For: TBE Staff, ESL/ELA Teachers; Teachers will receive ongoing professional development on Mondays from 2:20pm-4:00pm. They will also receive support from NYU on Tuesdays from 9:00am-9:45am Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: The ELL students in our school community will receive additional supports throughout ELL Family nights and Open Houses that will provide opportunities for students to showcase their work to their parents and families.The family engagement sessions will take part every marking period. All families will receive special invitations through SchoolMessenger, Pupil Path and notifications sent home. The parent coordinator works in conjunction with administrators and teachers to prepare workshops for the families of IS 171. Current research on ELL achievement and parent involvement notes a high correlation between the two. It is imperative that we are able to work with parents to improve our school culture, tone, and academic success. The following is a breakdown of parent involvement activities that foster this school-home relationship. Nutrition Workshops Provided By: Parent Coordinator (Spanish-English) For: All IS 171 Parents (Including ELLs) Dates: Ongoing through 2018-2019 school year Notification: Translated Flyers, School Messenger, Marquis Announcement, Monthly School Calendar, New School Website that can translate the content in over 40 languages. Pupil Path Parent Link Workshop Provided By: Parent Coordinator (Spanish-English) For: All IS 171 Parents (Including ELLs) Dates: September 2018 Notification: Translated Flyers, School Messenger, Marquis Announcement, Monthly School Calendar ,New School Website that can translate the content in over 40 languages. Parent Monthly Workshops Provided By: Principal and Parent Coordinator For: All IS 171 Parents (Including ELLs) Dates: One per month Notification: Translated Flyers, School Messenger, Marquis Announcement, Monthly School Calendar, New School Website that can translate the content in over 40 languages. Parent Volunteer Program Parents were trained and finger-printed in order to be part of our volunteer program. Parents assist during lunch, dances, during Parent Conferences, school trips and additional activities as deemed necessary by the parents and school. Organized By: Parent Coordinator Dates: Ongoing Notification: Flyers, School Messenger, Monthly School Calendar, New School Website that can translate the content in over 40 languages. Attendance records and agendas for parent workshops are kept in a binder in Ms. Otero's parent coordinators office. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities . Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $15,950  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Funding will be scheduled for a Bilingual/ENL pedagogue, and per session activities throughout the school year. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name IS 171 Borough Brooklyn School Number 171 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Indira Mota Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Hidalgo Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Udo/ENL Class/ Mr. Perchek Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Depalo/Science/SS Class Related-Service Provider Ms. Gibbs Superintendent Dr. Thomas McBryde Assistant Principal Ms. Kristen Conlon Coach N/A School Counselor Ms. Pardo-Vilanova Parent Angela Rivera Parent Coordinator Ms. Otero Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 4 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 449 Total number of ELLs 121 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. Teachers assess emergent literacy skills after observations indicate a student shows a deficiency in one of these areas. Students entering the middle school either from another city school or from another country are expected to have basic phonemic awareness, understanding of the function of various prints, etc. When observations indicate a student may be lacking, teachers use running records to assess the students’ abilities. If a student is at a middle school grade level and is deficient in emergent literacy skills then an evaluation may be recommended to provide the student with a smaller class setting and additional support to bring him/her to grade level. Results from individual assessments inform school leadership that additional support is necessary to help these students gain the literacy skills necessary to function in a middle school classroom. In ENL classrooms, the Inside program emphasizes phonemic awareness, and provides extensive examples of various text genres with specific features of each outlined prior to each reading. This year, teachers of ENLs will begin to use 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Myon online to assess students' early literacy skills, identify reading levels and monitor and track progress. This is made possible with a computer lab that will allow for multiple students to be administered the test at the same time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher team meetings during the school day facilitate teacher assessment of student progress and data analysis. We also meet weekly to discuss curriculum and make any necessary revisions. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ENL programs are constantly being monitored and improved as teachers and administration work closely to identify what works and what doesn’t work. The team uses assessments (both formal and informal), as well as teacher anecdotals to evaluate the success of a particular ELL program. In the previous year, teacher’s discussed a concern about newcomers having to read a novel, or write a full essay in English prior to even learning their colors. As a result the Inside program was purchased, including abridged novels, and newcomer text. Teachers also worked together to differentiate portfolio piece expectations, allowing for more native language in portfolio essays as students acquire English. The inquiry team and ENL teachers and staff are constantly working together to provide the best learning environment for the students. With the anticipated implementation of Myon.com as a formative assessment, teachers will be able to better assess and compare data across grades and ENL program, identifying needs and determining best means to address those needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teacher team meetings and professional learning sessions during the school day provide an opportunity to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use intake interviews, NYSESLAT Scores, State exam scores and Ed performance to evaluate and inform ELL programs. The data shows that the majority of our students are at the entering level. There is a need for intensive programs for our Entering students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher team meetings and professional learning sessions during the school day facilitate dissemination of findings to teachers in order to make adjustments to programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Block Programming, classes are mixed proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Grades 6, 7 and 8 mixed proficiency level special needs class. We also have a 6/7 and 7/8 bridge class. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL Instruction in TBE & Freestanding ENL Freestanding ENL Model: ENL classes are heterogeneously grouped and function as a push-in program. Student schedules provide 8 periods of push-in ENL support in which advanced students receive 180 minutes of explicit ENL and additional 4 periods focus on following the grade-appropriate ELA curriculum. Entering/Emerging students receive their mandated 360 minutes of explicit ENL and have an additional two periods of Writing Skills per week to support their English language growth. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Area Instruction Freestanding ESL: All proficiency levels receive content-area instruction in English using ENL methodologies with ENL support by a certified ENL teacher in various content areas. When possible or necessary teachers support student understanding using the student’s native language. Teachers emphasize vocabulary development and non-fiction reading fluency to help make content more comprehensible. Students participate in hands-on group projects and respond in essay form to demonstrate their understanding of content topics covered. ENL support is given via content area instruction, either through literacy, science, social studies or math. Teachers work together to differentiate instruction for varying proficiency levels and ENL teachers coach teachers of ELLs in ENL methodologies, such as scaffolding, activating prior knowledge, metacognition and use of visual materials and graphic organizers. Additional books have been purchased this year to develop our native language libraries as we have recently acquired new language groups of students. Providing books in the native language and allowing our students to provide some written responses in the native language is how we are able to support them in their native language without being able to speak it. In response to the CCSS shifts, teachers in content areas utilize the CCSS standards and stress evidence-based responses and non-fiction reading skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students in the TBE program are assessed initially using the Spanish LAB. In order to better assess our students Native Language and monitor their growth, IS 171 purchased Myon which includes a Spanish diagnostic tool and materials in Spanish that teachers will use to assess and monitor NL skills. At the end of the year all ELLs in the TBE program take the ELE as a summative assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instructional plan for SIFE: Teachers of ELLs use The Inside program Intervention component which includes easily decodable readings to help students adjust to both a new language and a formal school setting. The school is working with the Office of English Language Learners to identify additional resources and materials to support our SIFE population. Instructional plan for Newcomers: In addition to their weekly 360 minutes of ENL. As we examined our data we noticed that for the first time, the majority of our ELLs fall into the newcomer category. Professional development will focus on how to prepare our newcomers to take the ELA. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Instructional plan for 4-6 Year ELLs: The goal is to help them reach English proficiency before becoming a long-term ELL. They are exposed to grade-appropriate ELA aligned materials. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs who are identified as having special needs are placed into one of two programs. The first option is a TBE special needs classroom (12:1:1 bridge class). The class runs as any other TBE program in regards to the percentage of time spent in English and the students’ home Language; however, it also accommodates students with special needs by offering a smaller class size, as well as a highly differentiated curriculum to address each of their individual needs. The class combines the essentials of a TBE program and a special needs classroom. The second option is a monolingual special needs classroom with Freestanding ESL services. With this option, students are pulled-out either four or eight periods per week to receive ESL services in a small class setting. Inside is used to support academic vocabulary and non-fiction content based readings. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs by adhering strictly to their IEPs and placing them in appropriate settings. Teachers use various strategies (manipulatives, foldables, etc.) to reach grade-appropriate curricular goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs: All level 1s and low-2s, including ELLs are targeted as focus students. Tutorial is provided in math and ELA and instruction is in Spanish and English. Extended day via our CBO (English & Spanish) offering reading clubs, chess, and theater. Myon.com is used for all ELLs including LTEs and SIFE offering leveled readings and a diagnostic lexile tool 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Myon.com has been implemented for all ELA classes as a diagnostic and tracking tool. Codex is the ELA curriculum utilized by all commanding ENL classes. ENL teachers will provide push-in support for ENL classes. We also use a balanced literacy approach and independent reading. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Due to funding issues we no longer offer morning and after school Monday and Friday programs for the ENL population. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The receive the same educational and extra curricular opportunities as the entire school population. Gym, after school activities are geared toward ENL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have ENL computer carts in the ENL classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We use Google translate, we have translators that we pay to come in to the school to help with translation when needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We follow recommendations and provide services using certified teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not currently share resources with our co location. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Grade orientation with grade level staff present, Parent teacher conferences with an emphasis on expectations and an introduction of staff that are available to help ENL students. Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals, Principal, guidance counselors, deans and other support staff are always available. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not Applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Mondays from 3:00pm - 4:00 pm and Tuesdays from 9:00 to 9:45am all ENL teachers meet to plan as well as out side the school professional developments. All Teachers of ENLs receive the same Professional Development as non-teachers of ENLs in all areas of Common Core Learning Standards. All staff implementing new curriculum that are aligned with CCSS attend regular professional development trainings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students are supported, as all students at IS 171, in elementary to middle school transitions as well as middle to high school transitions. Sixth graders have additional support from a certified guidance counselor and teachers in the grade work closely together to help students adapt to the new school, through walk-arounds, library visits, and a thorough explanation of rules and expectations. Students in 7th and 8th grades receive support to prepare them for high school through guidance counselors, Cypress Hills Community Development Corporation, and our partnership with the CUNY Summer High School Transitions program. This year we have piloted a city program, Middle School Student Success Center (MSSSC), which aids students and their families with navigating the high-school choice program. Logs of teacher PD hours in the area of ENL topics will be recorded using attendance and agendas, as well as “thank-you” letters for teachers cumulative files. The chart of teachers participation will be kept in the ELL compliance binder in AP Conlon’s office. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school has an active and functioning PTA, a consultation committee involving parents, and has several daytime student performances for parents to attend. Parents are encouraged to participate as chaperons on all school trips. The ELL Department offers two ELL Parent Conferences, one in the Fall and one in the Spring, to teach parents about the NYSESLAT and other tests their students will be taking, as well as teaching parents how they can support their ELL child in the home. We hold a ELL Parent Conference at the school in the Fall and in the Spring. The Parent Coordinator offers Spanish translation services. Topics covered in Fall include supporting your ELL at home, how ELLs acquire language (BICS/CALP), brief overview of NYSESLAT, and other assessments ELLs must take. Spring topics include detailed look at the NYSESLAT and preparing for it. Parents also have opportunities throughout the year to meet and speak with their child’s teachers during Open House, and Parent-Teacher Conferences. School Messenger provides translation services for automated messages to be sent to parents’ phones. The school’s website communicates the school calendar and provides another avenue through which parents and teachers can communicate. In addition, the school marquis in front of the building announces school functions and other major announcements. Additionally, parent orientations are held for parents of new admits in the fall and spring and in between as necessary. All notices sent home are provided in English and Spanish. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ms. Otero, parent coordinator, along with the PTA have workshops for parents of ENL students to help familiarize them with the school and programs available to them. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Indira Mota, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: IS 171 School DBN: 19K171 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Indira Mota Title Principal Ms. Kristen Conlon Assistant Principal Ms. Z. Otero Parent Coordinator Ms. Udo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Angela Rivera Parent Mr. Perchekley/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Depalo/Science/SS Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Ms. Pardo-Vilanova School Counselor Dr. McBryde Tatyana Ulubabova Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A N/A N/A Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 6/27/18 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K171 School Name: Abraham Lincoln Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBr The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nelly Pena Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language/ Parent Surveys are completed for every student upon registration. These surveys provided us with information about the translation needs of our families. - Annual School Report Card provides us with information about our general school population. • Parents Preferred Language Forms are completed for every family upon registration. These forms indicate the language preference of each family and inform the school of oral and written translation needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese , French Arabic Bengali Mandarin Spanish 54.26 Spanish 55.17 Arabic Bengali Mandarin 1.37 .61 0 Arabic Bengali Mandarin 1.37 .61 .46 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We plan to provide written translation of all parent letters. Important information such as the Discipline Codes, parent workshop schedules, parent conference and open school night announcements and flyers will be written in languages other than English. At IS 171, we use our bilingual parent coordinator as well as other teachers to translate written information into Spanish. When necessary, we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to translate into other languages. b. As an additional option, and to be used sparingly, teachers will be encouraged to utilize online translation websites like Google Translation to provide written communication home. Ongoing/As Needed Parent Coordinator, Ms. Otero, will translate to parents as needed on an ongoing basis. Discipline Code Ongoing September - June School Calendars Ongoing September - June We use Pupil path, Google translate and parent coordinator We use Pupil path, Google translate and parent coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  School Letters Ongoing September - June We use Pupil path, Google translate and parent coordinator 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences - September 15 2016, October 26-27 2016, March 16, 2017, May 11, 2017 Parent Meetings throughout the school day and Graduation Activities Ongoing/As Needed Parent teacher Conferences 4 times a year, set by NYC Curriculum Night September 2018 Graduation June 2019 Awards Ceremonies 3 times a year interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator, Ms. Otero, will translate to parents as needed on an ongoing basis. Google translate, pupil path and parent coordinator Google translate, pupil path and parent coordinator Google translate, pupil path and parent coordinator Google translate, pupil path and parent coordinator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use school messenger to get emergency messages out in the languages we service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are given the chancellors regulation at the first day professional development. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) IS 171 will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities so that they will be aware of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services.. - The school will post signs in conspicuous locations, such as the sign-in desk and in front of the office, welcoming parents as well as informing parents that translation services are available. This notice is provided in covered languages and is downloaded from the DOE websited. . - Our school safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. - Currently, our major language group is Spanish (a covered language). Should we experience a rise (10% of students or more) in a language group that is not a covered language, the school will contact the Translation Services Unit to obtain necessary signage and required forms to be translated. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will send home a parent survey to evaluate the quality of the translation services provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63 
