2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K176 School Name: P.S. 176 OVINGTON Principal: ELIZABETH CULKIN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 176 The Ovington School 20K176 332000001000 Kindergarten-Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 1225 Bay Ridge Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11219 718-236-7755 Phone Number: 718-331-9188 Fax: Elizabeth Culkin eculkin@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Elizabeth Culkin Email Address: ChrisanthyGiannopoulos Janine Petrone Lily Tang Janine Petrone n/a Joanna Chan District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Karina Constantino Superintendent: 415 89 th Street Room 401 Brooklyn, NY 11209 KCostantino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director: Mauricierre De Govia 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 Street Brooklyn, New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.759.4862 Phone Number: 718.759.4862 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Elizabeth Culkin Chrisanthy Giannopoulos Janine Petrone Elizabeth Gallagher Irene Bonello Lily Tang Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mai Gao John Kessler Samantha Wong MarilynMurphy Member/Parent Member/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 176 is a diverse, collaborative, Title 1 School-wide Project community school dedicated to achieving academic excellence for every child. Through a high quality standards-driven curriculum, a nurturing environment where every child can discover, explore and reflect on ideas and concepts, the development of civic, social and technological 2018-19 CEP 9  strategies necessary to contribute to a global community and the strong belief in creating a lifelong love of learning, we commit our children, our families, ourselves and our resources. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 176, The Ovington School, is a large urban community elementary school located in Dyker Heights, Brooklyn. There are 1,352 students enrolled in our school, 29% of our student are English Language Learners. and 11% of our students are students with disabilities. We have a diverse school population in which 66% of students are Asian, 21% Hispanic, 11% Caucasian, 0.52% Black and 0.03% multi-racial. P.S. 176 is a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project school. Our school applies the workshop model protocols to all curricula areas and encourages student leadership and independence. Our children's voice and choice is important to us and is respected and valued. Students are independent thinkers who take ownership over their own learning and use rubrics, checklists and learning progressions to engage in self-assessment, reflection. and goal setting. As noted in the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018, P.S. 176 scored 4.73 for rigorous instruction. We strongly believe in creating a professional learning community in which all stake holders are both learners and teachers. This Supportive Environment promotes collaborative teacher teams that encourages distributive leadership and student led small groups and read-alouds, seminar experts, and peer critique circles. Our classrooms encourage students to wonder, explore, discover and consider new ideas and concepts. We have a strong commitment to technology and 21st Century tools, with updated technology, allowing students to interact in the larger global community, which clarifies and deepens student understanding. We believe in Equity and Excellence for all of our children, with strong voices from all stakeholders - our students, our parents, our teachers and our community as we endeavor to explore new ideas and "have a go" with new concepts. P.S. 176 places a strong emphasis on the social emotional needs of all students in our school community. Through programs such as Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, Therapeutic Crisis for Schools (TCIS), and classroom Serenity Centers, our school works toward classrooms that reflect a culture of integrity and trust to help accelerate student progress and performance. P.S. 176 teaches "Respect for All" which establishes a bond of trust with all essential stakeholders of the community. A school wide initiative, The Kindness Challenge, has been established where our children are kindness ambassadors to each other and they take on student leadership roles, where they are role models that set examples for their peers to do random act of kindness to promote a respectful environment that builds self confidence amongst all. P.S. 176 strives to not only promote academic success but also to build a positive social emotional well being for all. Our Parent Engagement activities invite our families in to participate in weekly Tuesday classroom meetings, monthly classroom visitations, Gallery Walks, Book Clubs, Cinema Under the Stars, family game night, Halloween Spooky Reading Night,our Beach Party, Dance Festival and partnerships with Inside Broadway and Marquis Studios. The excitement is palpable as our children and their families begin their STEM projects for our School MAKER FAIRE where everyone is a TINKER and all ideas and projects are welcomed and on display. We continue to reach-out to our 2018-19 CEP 10  families through SOAP BOX DERBY and partnerships with the US Army at Fort Hamilton Army Base as our teams compete at local and national levels in Derby races. Translations services are available through the NYCDOE Language Interpretation Unit for telephone conferences, our schools' website which can translate into 144 languages and School Messenger which aligns to the home language survey completed by the parent for native language speakers. In addition, monthly curriculum letters are sent home for each grade to share current units of study and suggested activities to do at home. We also host a NYCDOE Saturday ESL Parent program for any parent in our community who would like to learn English as well as a summer ESL Parent program. Tuesday afternoons are dedicated to Parent Engagement time with classroom teachers and ways parents and families can support their children. Perhaps the most important aspect of our community is the deep sense of trust that we share with our families as we work together to prepare our children for College and Career Readiness. This bond is our mission, our belief, our vision, that for all of the children that we serve, for all of their families that we have partnered with, that we have given our best effort, shared our best talents and done our best work. It is simply our mission and our vision for this community as we are called to serve. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Two special populations of students are our English Language Learners, (ELLs )and Students with Disabilities (SWD). Many of our students are new to the country and need support with language acquisition. Students with disabilities require further supports through specially designed instruction to make progress in annual goals and ensure access aligned to their areas of need. Additionally, we are implementing further supports for Social Emotional Learning as evidenced by our partnership with ReThink , Therapeutic Crisis for Schools, (TCIS) and Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Last year, we made progress in the area of Strong Family- Community ties. This year, we will continue to work on forming stronger ties with families through supporting the Social Emotional development of our children and their families as evidenced by parent workshops with our Mental Health Consultant and community partnerships with CITE and other vendors for workshops based on parent surveys, such as, Video Screen Addiction. Cyber Bullying, Positive Discipline, and Temper Tantrums and Tears 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K176 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1334 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 36 56 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 56 56 4 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 81.4% % Reduced Lunch 28.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 20.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.66 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 64.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 110 103 56 97.3% 5.4% 10.9% 0.6% 66.8% 0.5% 4 0% 7 75.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) A review of our needs assessment, determined that 88% of students tested in the NYS ELA 2017 assessment cycle met criteria (levels 2,3, and 4). In 2018, (based on the June met/did not meet RASP report) 94% of students met the NY ELA benchmark standard levels 2, 3,4. Through a comparative analysis of our student achievement, as measured by the Spring 2018 MoSLs, there was a 5% increase to 80% of students meeting and exceeding benchmark. After reviewing the NYS Math assessment 2017 results, 97% of all students tested achieved standards, levels 2,3,4. In 2018, (based on the June met/did not meet RASP report) 97% of all students who were tested performed at or above standards on the NYS Math assessments. 2) While our data, according to the school report card, reflects the majority of students meeting standards, it is our priority to continue to improve the progress of all students to meet and exceed standard based work. 1) Through a comparative analysis of our student achievement by sub-group, as measured by the Spring 2018 MoSLs, students with disabilities increased their ability to meet standards by 10.4% and our ELLs increased their ability by 6.8% as evidenced by effective response to intervention and academic supports provided through our after-school and Saturday school programs. 1) Analyzing data generated from conference notes, pre/post assessments, teacher conferences, Exemplars, group/partner work indicates that our students are increasing their mathematical thinking and reasoning ability. 2) While the NYC Elementary School Snapshot/Guide and Dashboard Performance analysis reflects additional credit earned for improving student performance it still reflects the need for a stronger commitment to accelerate the progress for these sub-groups. 1) and 2) As the school survey reflects, P.S. 176 places a strong emphasis on the social emotional needs of all students in our school community. Through programs such as Sanford Harmony, Rethink, TCIS, classroom Serenity Centers and PBIS, the school works towards a culture of integrity and trust to help accelerate student progress and performance. P.S. 176 teaches "Respect for All" which establishes a bond of trust with all essential stakeholders of the community. A school wide initiative, The Kindness Challenge, has been established where our children are kindness ambassadors to each other and they take on student leadership roles, where they are role models that set examples for their peers 2018-19 CEP 13  to do random act of kindness to promote a respectful environment that builds self confidence amongst all. P.S. 176 strives to not only promote academic success but also to build a positive social emotional well being for all. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of all students will show progress in all academic curricular areas and social emotional development across all grades. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Metamorphosis Math professional development across grades, on-site staff developer, TERC Investigations, EngageNY, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations All students K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Math Coach, on-site staff developer, Math Specialists Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum, on-site staff developers, specialty groups, professional development days, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations Small group instruction, conferring, partner/peer work, self-assessing using rubrics and checklists, use of manipulatives, student led small groups, heterogeneous grouping, language objectives, total physical response, visual supports, title 1 Reading intervention, Orton Gillingham, Fundations and Max Scholar Phonics support Parent letters/emails, updates on school and class websites, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement workshops, First Friday visitation for parents to learn Math games, reading workshop routines an strategies, end of unit celebrations, technology workshops Students with disabilities All students K- 5 All students Social emotional learning programs including, Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Kindness Challenge, Respect for All K-5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement English Language Learners/ September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Math Coach, on-site staff developer, Math Specialists September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Math Coach, on-site staff developer, Math Specialists, Parent coordinator Classroom teachers, support staff, guidance counselor, Crisis Intervention team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 176 will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core through a series of parent engagement workshops and opportunities. Tuesday Parent Engagement workshops, hosted by 2018-19 CEP 15  classroom teachers and the Parent Coordinator will allow parents to become familiar with Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum. The workshop model, small group instruction model and partner work will be modeled for parents in order for them to replicate and support their students at home. Monthly parent letters will also be sent home in English and translated versions, to share monthly goals and objectives with parents, as well as provide "At Home Activities" to support rigorous instruction in all curricular areas. Through parent surveys, organized by the parent coordinator, families will have the opportunity to attend a series of parent workshops focused on adolescent child development and effective parenting to give parents applicable skills and knowledge that they can practice as members of the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-teachers, support staff, math coach, math specialists, guidance counselor, parent coordinator. Instructional resources- TERC investigations, EngageNY modules and exemplars, Metamorphosis Math routines, games, instructional supports. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, on-site staff development, professional learning, specialty groups, Schedule adjustments- common planning time for grade teams, cycles of staff development provided for grades, Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Respect for All, Kindness Challenge Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student progress will be monitored with a baseline assessment administered at the beginning of the school year; this will be followed up by a benchmark assessment in December. Student progress will be monitored monthly by assessing their performance on math exemplars, running records, on demand reading, end of unit assessments, exit tickets, conference notes and strategy groups. Unit pre/interim/post assessments will be used to inform instruction and to monitor student results and progress. Social Emotional workshops- Feedback surveys will be provided at the end of each parent workshop and reviewed by the parent coordinator to set up further series of support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Unit of Study Formative/Summative assessments, AR, Imagine Learning Exemplars Math/Science, conferring conferences, notes/observations Max Scholar and Fundations Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Respect for All, Kindness Challenge Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Students and families have positive feelings about the school as evidenced through daily attendance rates, School Learning Environment Survey, low detention rate and Framework for Great Schools Report 2018 School survey- feeling safe in your school 98% Attendance rates- 97.3 % Detention rate 0% Parents recommending this school to other families- 98% Social and Emotional measure 99% Press Toward Academic Achievement 93% Peer support for academic work 97% ● High expectations are communicated to all of the school’s constituents by teachers knowing their students and working to support their individual needs as learners as well as to celebrate their strengths and what they are doing well. Teachers have high expectations for all students and this is communicated through the use and examination of exemplar work, highlighting student work, student and teacher collaborative goal setting and rubric examination to plan next steps. Student participation in parent teacher conferences allows students to take ownership of their learning and communicate the high expectations for learning with their parents. Parent engagement events such as workshops and celebrations also help to communicate our school-wide high expectations for student learning. Every Tuesday parents were invited to their child’s classroom to discuss strategies for reading, writing and math to support their child at home. ● School wide and classroom expectations are created collaboratively with students, parents and teachers. There are systems in place to monitor and highlight model student behavior, such as Perfect Attendance Celebration, Student of the Month, Awards Assembly, Student Council, Awards Bulletin Board, Honor Society, Respect for All and the Kindness Challenge. ● A trusting environment is evident in the school in which students participate in community service activities. These activities enhance students understanding and awareness of civic responsibility. Students support one another and 2018-19 CEP 17  are involved in peer mediation to problem solve. With the support of the guidance counselor, students are involved in fund raising for the Make-A-Wish organization, Pennies for Patients, and raising money for St. Jude's Hospital. ● Teachers feel comfortable visiting each other classrooms, conducting peer observations and inter- visitations, interdependence among teachers, and a culture of trust is evident. P.S. 176 places a strong emphasis on the social emotional needs of all students in our school community as the school's priority need. Through programs such as Sanford Harmony, Rethink and PBIS, TCIS and classroom Serenity Centers, the school works towards a culture of integrity and trust to help accelerate student progress and performance. P.S. 176 teaches "Respect for All" which establishes a bond of trust with all essential stakeholders of the community. A school wide initiative, The Kindness Challenge, has been established where our children are kindness ambassadors to each other and they take on student leadership roles, where they are role models that set examples for their peers to do random act of kindness to promote a respectful environment that builds self confidence amongst all. P.S. 176 strives to not only promote academic success but also to build a positive social emotional well being for all. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of all students will show progress in self-monitoring their own learning and social emotional development through self-assessment, reflection and goal setting increasing student leadership, independence and raising rigorous expectations for academic and social achievements as evidenced by the Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Metamorphosis Math professional development focused in habits of mind and mathematical discourse to create a supportive enviornment across grades, on-site staff developer, TERC Investigations, EngageNY. All Students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum, on-site staff developers, specialty groups, professional development days, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations focusing on giving students leadership opportunities. For example, giving students choice in topics for seminar work that they are comfortable with and collaborating in small group work. Small group instruction, conferring, partner/peer work, self-assessing using rubrics and checklists, use of manipulatives, student led small groups, heterogeneous grouping, language objectives, total physical response, visual supports, title 1 Reading intervention, Orton Gillingham, Max Scholar and Fundations Phonics support Parent letters/emails, updates on e-chalk, class websites, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement workshops, First Friday visitation for parents to learn Metamorphosis games, reading workshop routines an strategies, end of unit celebrations, technology workshops Students with disabilities and English language learners All Students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Social emotional learning programs including, Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, Ruler, Kindness Challenge, Respect for All All Students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, Math Coach, on-site staff developer, Math/reading Specialists, Parent coordinator Classroom teachers, Math Coach, on-site staff developer, Math/reading Specialists, Parent coordinator Classroom teachers, Math Coach, on-site staff developer, Math/reading Specialists, Parent coordinator Classroom teachers, support staff, guidance counselor, Crisis Intervention team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PS 176 will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment through a series of parent engagement workshops and opportunities. Tuesday Parent Engagement workshops, hosted by classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 19  and the Parent Coordinator will allow parents to become familiar with Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum. The guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator will also lead a series of workshops throughout the year designed to promote positive, strong relationships between families and within the school community. Parents will be invited to attend presentations organized by the guidance counselor- Beautiful Me, RULER, Sanford Harmony, NED Show, Omega Man, J-Line, and BMX Bike Show to promote student self confidence as well to establish strong partnerships between families, teachers, students and the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-teachers, support staff, guidance counselor, math coach, math specialists. Instructional resources- TERC investigations, EngageNY modules and exemplars, Metamorphosis Math routines, games, instructional supports. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, on-site staff development, professional learning, specialty groups, Schedule adjustments- common planning time for grade teams, cycles of staff development provided for grades. Social Emotional- Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Respect for All, Kindness Challenge Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student progress will be monitored with a baseline assessment administered at the beginning of the school year; this will be followed up by a benchmark assessment in February. Student progress will be monitored monthly by assessing their performance on math exemplars, running records, on demand reading, end of unit assessments, exit tickets, conference notes and strategy groups. Students will engage in self and peer assessment using rubrics aligned to standards. Unit pre/post assessments will be used to inform instruction and note student growth and progress. Social Emotional workshops- Feedback surveys will be provided at the end of each parent workshop and reviewed by the parent coordinator to set up further series of support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Social Emotional- Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Respect for All, Kindness Challenge Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting our needs assessment, we identified teacher strength in collecting and analyzing student data. Through this comparison we have adopted a new word study program to increase reading proficiency. Teachers place a strong emphasis on guided practice to develop strategies, book introductions, and revisit and refine the units of study to meet individual student needs. Additionally, analyzing the MoSL benchmark levels and reading behaviors, teachers will accelerate student progress and performance. We have also worked hard to enhance the ability of teachers to use this data to develop rigorous goals and objectives to increase student performance and social emotional development. We have identified a need to continue to increase teacher ability to develop effective data-driven analysis for instruction in deepening student thinking across text complexity through questioning. Also, developing professional development opportunities based on NYC School Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, aligned to the Framework for Great Schools, we shall increase the ability of our teachers by 90% to analyze student data to increase instructional excellence and social emotional development. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers College reading and writing curriculum, on-site staff developers, teachers attend professional development sessions, common planning time for grades, professional learning time, ADVANCE, post observation feedback, frequent short cycles of observations with specific feedback as evidenced by a research based rubric and professional learning (100 minutes) of weekly collaborative inquiry study to enrich teacher craft and practice. Metamorphosis Math professional development across grades, on-site staff developer, TERC Investigations, EngageNY specialty groups, professional development days, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations Small group instruction, conferring, partner/peer work, self-assessing using rubrics and checklists, use of manipulatives, student led small groups, heterogeneous grouping, language objectives, total physical response, visual supports, title 1 Reading intervention, Orton Gillingham, Fundations and Max Scholar Phonics support Parent letters/emails, updates on e-chalk, class websites, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement workshops, First Friday visitation for parents to learn Metamorphosis games, reading workshop routines an strategies, end of unit celebrations, technology workshops Teachers will collaborate with support staff, the guidance counselor and crisis team to work on programs that promote the growth of the social emotional needs of all students. such as Social emotional learning programs including, Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Kindness Challenge, Respect for All. All students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 22 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, School leaders, staff developers, grade leaders, reading and math specialists, lab site specialists English Language Learners and Students with disabilities All students K-5 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, School leaders, staff developers, grade leaders, reading and math specialists, lab site specialists Teachers, School leaders, staff developers, grade leaders, reading and math specialists, lab site specialists, Parent coordinator Teachers, school support staff, guidance counselor, Crisis Intervention team  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Teacher Student conferences are held over the course of the school year to share information with families around a child's academic strengths and challenges and social emotional development. Monthly families translated family letters are shared to convey goals and objectives for each curricula area. September's Open School Night is an important evening in which our rigorous curricula is explained, high expectations for student learning are shared and the strong partnerships that we wish to established with our families are conveyed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-teachers, support staff, math coach, math specialists. Instructional resources- TERC investigations, EngageNY modules and exemplars, Metamorphosis Math routines, games, instructional supports. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, on-site staff development, professional learning, specialty groups, Schedule adjustments- common planning time for grade teams, inter-visitations, peer observations, cycles of staff development provided for grades, advance workshops. Social Emotional- Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Respect for All, Kindness Challenge Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Pre and post observation conferences, frequent cycles of specific feedback, peer observations, inter-visitations, collaborative preparation and planning as measured by Danielson's Framework for Teaching, walk-throughs by administration checking up on students based on the effectiveness of guided practice and data analysis, and Sanford Harmony instruction Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYCDOE Danielson's Framework ADVANCE, coaching into cycles of observations, lifting practice through inter-visitations, peer observations and professional reading cycles, lab site visitations, on-site staff developers - SHOW don't TELL, MoSL benchmarks administered in September, November, February and May to notice trends and increase student proficiency, and monthly student inquiry to analyze trends and data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conducting our needs assessment, we identified strengths in the school structures that promote distributive leadership within the school community. These structures include: grade leaders, lab-site specialists, vertical and horizontal teacher teams sharing pertinent information and plans, consistently communicating with school leaders, making instructional decisions, promoting students leadership and engaging in reflective dialogue as evidenced by the continuous support of social emotional development. Based on the needs assessment data, teachers will lead one another in targeted professional development that inform craft and practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, aligned to the Framework for Great Schools 97% of teachers will work collaboratively to distribute leadership, promote reflective practices in social emotional development, and lead one another in targeted professional development that informs their craft and practice as evidenced through meetings, agendas and attendance documents, and classroom culture as measured through Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher led targeted professional developments from Teachers College reading and writing curriculum, on-site staff developers, teachers attend professional development sessions, common planning time for grades, professional learning time, ADVANCE, post observation feedback All members of school community September 2018-June 2019 Teacher led targeted professional developments from Metamorphosis Math professional development across grades, on-site staff developer, TERC Investigations, EngageNY specialty groups, professional development days, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations Inter-visitations of teachers to showcase small group instruction, conferring, partner/peer work, self-assessing using rubrics and checklists, use of manipulatives, student led small groups, heterogeneous grouping, language objectives, total physical response, visual supports, title 1 Reading intervention, Orton Gillingham, Max Scholar and Fundations Phonics support Students with disabilities and English language learners September 2018-2019 Parent letters/emails, updates on school and class websites, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement workshops, First Friday visitation for parents to learn Metamorphosis games, reading workshop routines an strategies, end of unit celebrations, technology workshops All students K-5 September 2018-2019 Social emotional learning programs including, Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Ruler, Kindness Challenge, Respect for All All students K-5 September 2018-2019 Teachers, reading and math specialists/coaches, support staff, school leaders, staff developers, ESL coach Teachers, reading and math specialists/coaches, support staff, school leaders, staff developers, ESL coach Teachers, reading and math specialists/coaches, support staff, school leaders, staff developers, ESL coach, Parent Coordinator Teachers, school support staff, guidance counselor, Crisis Intervention team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 25  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, school administrators will be present and engaged in all activities especially where families are participating. Cinema Under the Stars, Spooky Reading Night, Beach Party, Pumpkin Patch and other activities that engage our families. Monthly meeting of the PTA and SLT, Title 1 PTA sub committee will engage in discussions and partnerships with school leaders to support and build parent leadership and engagement. PTA sponsored events and celebrations will also support Parent leadership in a wide variety of events such as Pocketbook Bingo, workshops and institutes on topics that parents selected from their survey. Parent craft workshops led by their colleagues are a family favorite. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: teachers, support staff, math coach, math specialists. Instructional resources- TERC investigations, EngageNY modules and exemplars, Metamorphosis Math routines, games, instructional supports. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, on-site staff development, professional learning, specialty groups, Schedule adjustments- common planning time for grade teams, inter-visitations, peer observations, cycles of staff development provided for grades, advance workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student progress will be monitored with a baseline assessment administered at the beginning of the school year; this will be followed up by a benchmark assessment in February. Student progress will be monitored monthly by assessing their performance on math exemplars, running records, on demand reading, end of unit assessments, exit tickets, conference notes and strategy groups. Students will engage in self and peer assessment using rubrics aligned to standards. Unit pre/interim/post assessments will be used to inform instruction and monitor student growth and progress. Pre and post observation conferences, frequent cycles of specific feedback, peer observations, inter-visitations, collaborative preparation and planning as measured by Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School surveys sent out by the professional development committee sent out on a monthly basis to obtain feedback from teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing results from our Framework for Great Schools Report and Learning Environment Survey, our parents reflect that our school has a warm and genuinely caring culture. Our parents have expressed an interest in a desire to participate/communicate in more school functions. Our teachers have worked to improve communication and family engagement. 98% of our parents feel strongly that their students’ teachers consistently inform them of their child’s progress. This has become a strength of the school as evidenced through: parent engagement Tuesdays, small group workshops, demonstration lessons, First Friday’s, writing celebrations, family game night, family spooky reading night, Cinema under the stars, technology workshops, pumpkin patch and many performance where parents are encouraged to see their child shine. A priority need will be working diligently to survey parent needs and provide parents with more opportunities to visit our school including, parent ESL workshops, parent field trips, parent coordinator craft workshops, parent volunteer opportunities and translation of all materials in all appropriate languages to ensure parent understanding and successful communication. But, perhaps our most successful parent engagement component is our First Friday Parent Engagement Class Visitations when our children's parents and grandparents come to visit their child's class and are engaged in book talks, Gallery walks, debates, seminar circles, peer conferring critique chats and gain a sense of the important work that is taking place each and every day. Through parent surveys, organized by the parent coordinator, families will have the opportunity to attend a series of parent workshops focused on adolescent child development and effective parenting to give parents applicable skills and knowledge that they can practice as members of the school community. Through a partnership with Cornell University, Healthy Children Healthy Familiies (HCHF), we will support parents and caregivers by providing education on nutrition, physical activity, and parenting practices that help families make healthy changes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 27  By June 2019, we shall increase our communication and engagement skills for our parents and school community by an increase 5%. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent visitations and letters to participate in Metamorphosis Math professional development across grades, on-site staff developer, TERC Investigations, EngageNY on First Fridays and Parent Engagements on Tuesdays. All Students K-5 and families September 2018-June 2019 Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum, on-site staff developers, specialty groups, professional development days, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations Parent visitations and letters to participate in Parent Engagement Tuesdays and First Fridays. Small group instruction, conferring, partner/peer work, self-assessing using rubrics and checklists, use of manipulatives, student led small groups, heterogeneous grouping, language objectives, total physical response, visual supports, title 1 Reading intervention, Orton Gillingham, Max Scholar and Fundations Phonics support, small group parent workshops for math and reading support, parent conferences with ESL coordinator, parent participation in IEP meetings and Tuesday, small group engagement sessions that teach parents how to support their child at home Parent communication-emails, telephone calls, School Messenger, parent/family volunteers, family participation in classroom/school celebrations, families participate in classroom workshops, Parent ESL classes, Parent coordinator coordinated activities-community trips and workshops September 2018-June 2019 English Language Learners and Students with disabilities and families All students K-5 and families September 2018-June 2019 Social emotional learning programs including, Sanford Harmony, Rethink, PBIS, Ruler, TCIS, Classroom Serenity Centers, Kindness Challenge, Respect for All, parenting classes and mental health workshops All students K-5 and families September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, reading and math specialists/coaches, support staff, school leaders, staff developers, ESL coach, Parent Coordinator, PTA, families Teachers, reading and math specialists/coaches, support staff, school leaders, staff developers, ESL coach, Parent Coordinator, PTA, families Teachers, reading and math specialists/coaches, support staff, school leaders, staff developers, ESL coach, Parent Coordinator, PTA, families Teachers, school support staff, PTA, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, Crisis Intervention team, CBO partnerships 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Family events in which school leadership is present: Cinema Under the Stars, Spooky Reading Night, Maker Faire, Inside Broadway performances, parent workshops on surveyed topics of their choice, parent craft workshops, Cornell University HCHF nutrition workshops, parent ESL workshops, Chinese American Sunshine House to support families in need. PTA Activities - monthly meetings, workshops, celebrations and events such as Pocketbook Bingo - a night out for the ladies. CPC- Chinese Planning Council After-school program. Inside Broadway and Marquis Studio- ending performances with parents invited. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-teachers, support staff, math coach, math specialists. Instructional resources- TERC investigations, EngageNY modules and exemplars, Metamorphosis Math routines, games, instructional supports. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, on-site staff development, professional learning, specialty groups, Schedule adjustments- common planning time for grade teams, inter-visitations, peer observations, cycles of staff development provided for grades, advance workshops Parent coordinator workshops, activities, parent field trips, parent ESL classes, PTA meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitored by parent surveys, participation in school events, attendance sheets, email communication, school website, school messenger, parent coordinator conferences and professional development sessions, verbal and written feedback from families. Parent engagement committee will meet and discuss attendance and survey results of parent involvement since beginning of school year in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PTA attendance, online programs visitations, workshops, art/crafts workshops, Tuesday, engagement, First Friday classroom visitations, Family Engagement Activities, School Messenger, class websites, school, grade, class celebrations over the school year, measured by attendance, agendas, minutes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student progress is carefully monitored through observation, conferences, small group work, exit tickets, running records, exemplar work, pre/interim/post units of study assessments, imagine English, Max Scholar, ST Math Reports. Students who are not progressing are identified and RTI is is initiated and carefully monitored by classroom teacher, school assessment team, school implementation team and administration Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. FundationsWord Study 1. Small Group/1:1 2. Related Services- speech 2. Small Group/1:1 3. Orton Gillingham Word Study 3. Small Group/1:1 4. Reading Rescue 4. Small Group/1:1 5. Max Scholar Word Study 5. Small Group/1:1 6. Across the World- ELL 6. Small Group/1:1 7. Genius Hour-STEM 7. Small Group/1:1 8. Explorers Club 8. Small Group/1:1 9. Saturday School Academy 9. Small Group/1:1 10. Literacy Apprenticeship 11. Accelerated Reader 12.My On Reading 13. Imagine English online literacy support 14. Reading Power 15. Great Leaps 10. Small Group/1:1 11. Small Group/1:1 12. Small Group/1:1 13. Small Group/1:1 14. Small Group/1:1 15. Small Group/1:1 1. During school day 2. During school day 3. During school day 4. During school day 5. During school day 6. After School program 7. After School program 8. After School program 9. Saturday morning program 10. After School program 11. During school day 12. During school day 2018-19 CEP 31  Mathematics Science 13. During school day 14. During School day 15. During School day 1. During school day 2. After School program 3. After School program 4. During school day 5. Duringschool day 6. After School program 7. During school day 8. During school day 1. During/After school day 2. During/After school day 3. During/After school day 4. During/After school day Student progress is carefully monitored through observation, conferences, small group work, exit tickets, running records, exemplar work, pre/interim/post units of study assessments, i-ready, imagine English, raz kids reports. Students who are not progressing are identified and RTI is initiated and carefully monitored by classroom teacher, school assessment team, school implementation team and administration Student progress is carefully monitored through observation, conferences, small group work, exit tickets, running records, exemplar work, pre/interim/post units of study assessments, i-ready, imagine English, raz kids 1. Related Services 1. Small Group/1:1 2. Math Wizards 2. Small Group/1:1 3. Genius Hour- STEM 3. Small Group/1:1 4. Pearson online 4. Small Group/1:1 5. Exemplars 6. Mathletics 7. Context for Learning-Metamorphosis Math 8. ST Math 5. Small Group/1:1 6. Small Group 7. Small Group 8. Small Group/1:1 1. Weather Bug 1. Small Group/1:1 2. Trust for Public land: 2. Small Group/1:1 Environmental Literacy 3. Small Group/1:1 3. Brooklyn Botanical Gardens 4. Small Group/1:1 5. Small Group/1:1 4. Foss Science 6. Small Group/1:1 5. Science Non-fiction DK 7. Small Group/1:1 2018-19 CEP 32  reports. Students who are not progressing are identified and RTI is is initiated and carefully monitored by classroom teacher, school assessment team, school implementation team and administration Social Studies Student progress is carefully monitored through observation, conferences, small group work, exit tickets, running records, exemplar work, pre/interim/post units of study assessments, i-ready, imagine English, raz kids reports. Students Libraries 6. NYCDOE Citizen Science 8. Small Group/1:1 7. Young Budding Scientists Program 9. Small Group/1:1 8. Liberty Science Center partnership 9. Amplify Science 10. Sustainability 11. Robotics 10. Small Group/1:1 11.Small Group/1:1 12.Small Group/1:1 13. Small Group/1:1 12. Engineering 14.Small Group/1:1 13. Coding 14. Young Budding Scientist 1. NYS Social Studies program K-5 2. NY Historical Society 1. Small Group/1:1 2. Small Group/1:1 3 Small Group/1:1 3. Colonial Williamsburg Foundation 5. During school day 6. During school day 7. During/After school day 8. During/After school day 9. During/After school day 10. During/After school day 11.During/After school day 12. During/After school day 13. During/After school day 14.During/After school day 1. During school day 2. During/After school day 3. During/After school day 4. NYSSocial Studies Standards 4. Small Group/ 1:1 4. During/ After school day 2018-19 CEP 33  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) who are not progressing are identified and RTI is is initiated and carefully monitored by classroom teacher, school assessment team, school implementation team and administration Students are identified by classroom teachers, parents, observations, peer interactions, behavior monitoring and the RTI process. 5. NYCDOEPassport 5. Small Group/ 1:1 5. During School day 1. Pupil Personnel Team-RTI strategies/ 1. Small Group/1:1 supports/cycles/PRIM supports 2. Mandated Counseling/RTI/PRIM/Counseling supports and community outreach efforts 2. Small Group 3. Small Group 4. Small Group 5. All Grades 6. Designated students/classes 3. At Risk Counseling RTI/PRIM/Counseling supports and community outreach efforts 7. All grades 4. Family Services-Community 1. During school day 3. During school day 4. During school day 5. During school day 6. During school day 7. During school day Mental Health facilities and 8. Teachers and Parents services/RTI/PRIM 5. Respect for All Campaign- Ned Show, Kindness Challenge 8. During school day/ after school workshops/NY Islanders, anti-bullying workshops/Student-Peer intervention/Student Council 6. Open Airways-asthma supports and workshops 2018-19 CEP 34  7. Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Learning 8. Brooklyn South Field Training Center topics/ survey from parents 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School provides, uniforms, coats, hats, boots, school supplies, school bag, community service resources medical/dental/vision/hearing,family counseling/individual counseling 80 students PC and GC workshops to support families and students Academic supports for struggling students Health Care Plus- parent workshops Cornell University HCFC Parent Coordinator and Guidance workshops Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers are highly qualified as verified by District 20's Support HR Director to ensure that the teacher holds valid NYS certification in the license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the HR Director who works with our school to ensure that teacher assignments are aligned with license areas. PS 176 has formed collaborative partnerships with colleges and universities as a teacher-training site for student teachers to develop instructional practices and cutting edge 21st Century multimedia tools to accelerate student progress. PS 176 has formed collaborative partnerships with the Division of Informational Technology participating in Title II D grants to enrich the professional development opportunities for teachers to use 21st Century multimedia tools in the instructional program to enrich, deepen student understanding. PS 176 has formed collaborative partnerships with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project schools to provide literacy professional development for teachers to build collaborative literacy teaching teams aligned to content and data inquiry teams to analyze student data in order to accelerate student progress. PS 176 has formed collaborative partnerships with many cultural institutions: New York Historical Society, Liberty Science Center, Weather Bug, Achieve, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, New York Aquarium, Bronx Zoo, Robotics, Tenement House, Colonial Williamsburg, NYC Ballet, Marquis Studios, Inside Broadway, Liberty Science Center San Francisco Exploratorium to provide multiple opportunities for teachers and students to explore a variety of student selected topics such as Environmental Literacy through small collaborative cross grade student groups speaking via Skype/Face Time to docents/researchers on their topic of interest to deepen student understanding and accelerated progress to meet and exceed New York State Common Core standards. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 38  At PS 176 all of our teachers are highly qualified. PS 176 has formed strong collaborative professional learning partnerships with: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Future Problem Solving, STEM Robotics, Metamorphosis Math, New York Historical Society, NYCDOE Office of Digital Literacy, NYCDOE Office of English Language Learners, Liberty Science Center, Weather Bug, Achieve, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens, New York Aquarium, Bronx Zoo, Robotics, Tenement House, Colonial Williamsburg, San Francisco Exploratorium, NYCDOE Danielson Framework for Teaching training for teachers and administrators, and network professional learning programs to support ADVANCE, ESL and Students with special needs workshops and cultural institutes provide support for all stakeholders. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Transition plans for preschool children to our school begin with an outreach by our Parent Coordinator to preschool programs within our zoned area. During this discussion with the preschool director, the Parent Coordinator can assist in identifying students who are zoned for our school, and set up a visitation schedule for parents to come and visit our school. We have a Parent Orientation meeting in which our Parent Coordinator, Pupil Accounting Secretary, Kindergarten teacher and PTA parent will share some of our school’s special programs and answer parent questions. Kindergarten packets are created and sent home to incoming students and parent meetings are set up in June. The Turning 5 program addresses students with special needs. Our School Psychologist and Social Worker are involved in classroom visits and observations to pre-school programs to assess student needs for the least restrictive environmentplacement. During their visitation they meet with the child’s classroom teachers as well as the preschool director to discuss the child and answer any questions. As a full services school, with therapies offered on-site, our related services providers can also speak with a parent and provide information. 2018-19 CEP 39  Throughout the entire transition process our Parent Coordinator, Pupil Accounting Secretary, Kindergarten teachers and PTA parents can meet with preschool parents and take them on a tour of our building so that they can view the programs that we offer and make an informed decision for their child. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assessments must be meaningful and have a purpose. We look for quality and not quantity in making our selections. Our school’s decisions regarding assessments are made collaboratively with our teachers. Grade Leaders meet with our coaches and administration to discuss the quality of an assessments and its purpose in measuring student results and accelerating student progress. Grade Leaders share the information with their colleagues and return to a second meeting with coaches and administrators with the grade’s information. A review of the assessment plan is completed with assessments removed if they are not essential to measuring student progress. An assessment plan is developed at this meeting and presented to all stakeholders during our common planning time. The document is open for discussion and review. The assessment plan document is presented to the School Leadership Team, and PTA for further discussion. The assessment plan is adopted and implemented with teacher confirmation and the consent of the SLT and PTA. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Goals1-5 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal 1,053,922 81, 897 X X P 10-20 Goals1-5 P 10-20 2018-19 CEP 40  Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 49,870 0 7,637,242 X X X Goals1-5 P 10-20 Pending Goals1-5 P 10-20 Goals 1-5 P 10-20 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 41  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 176, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 176 The Ovington School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format,and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report,School Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 45  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 176 The Ovington School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 46  I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; establishing a culture of learning that meets the social emotional needs of each student ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas, including Social Emotional Learning ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 CEP 48  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Across the World for English Language Learners Based on data obtained through ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), RLAT and NYSITELL, it was learned that many of our Entering and Emergent English Language Learners (ELLs) would benefit from increased instruction in basic literacy concepts. The program uses Up the Ladder series which is designed to support our ELLs who haven't met the benchmark levels in writing. The instructional materials are aligned to the TCRWP Units of Study on grade level so that they have access to the Core Curriculum. In addition, we also use National Geographic Ladders to ensure that our ELLs have access to multiple levels of text, including grade level texts as they strive to learn academic vocabulary and the new language. The program is broken up into three sections for each meeting. Students are engaged in word study activities which include word sorts, rhyming words, prefixes/suffixes, blends/digraphs, inflectional endings and multisyllabic words. Then the ENL teacher models a skill or strategy to the students through rich literature. These mini-lessons are content driven around Social Studies and Science. Students are then working in small groups based on their needs and strengths to practice the skills and strategies or using technology to personalize learning. There are 60 ELLs participating in this program. - Serving ELLs in grades 2-5 at the Entering and Emergent proficiency levels. - Offer in October through May on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20-4:20 p.m. after school. There are 42 sessions. - The language of instruction is English. - 4 ESOL certified teachers - Materials used specifically for this program are the following: Up the Ladder series, National Geographic Ladders and Longman Picture Dictionary in different translations. We are also differentiating instruction using online literacy programs that build the language skills tailored to individual needs through the use of MaxScholar and myOn purchased by FSF/Tax Levy funds. - Program notification in parents’ preferred languages are sent home in student backpacks. The information is also posted and translated into different languages on Remind, WeChat and class websites via Google platform. In addition, we’ve purchased School Messenger, a telephone contact that notifies parents about the program in their preferred language. - We keep records of student attendance in school file. Saturday Scholars Academy for English Language Learners Based on data obtained through EDAT, RLAT, RMSR and NYSITELL as well as teacher recommendations, students across all proficiency levels who require additional assistance in meeting grade level benchmarks are invited to participate in the Saturday Scholars Academy program. This program is designed to enhance students' comprehension skills through teacher modeling, think aloud, supported small group work and peer collaboration. Students are provided with access to grade level texts and provided with strategies such as identifying the main idea 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and supporting details, inferencing, and understanding text structure. ELL students are also given the opportunity to work with math problems designed to enhance collaboration and higher level thinking skills. Teachers provide scaffolds that enable students to understand the key vocabulary and what the question is asking, determining the information they know and strategies to problem solving. There are 208 ELLs participating in the program. - Serving ELLs in grades 3-5 across all proficiency levels. - Offer in March on Saturdays from 8:30-11:30 a.m. There are 4 sessions. - The language of instruction is English. - 10 ESOL certified teachers - Materials used are the following: National Geographic Ladders, National Geographic magazines, TERC Investigations and glossaries in different translations. We are also differentiating instruction using online literacy programs that build the language skills tailored to individual needs through the use of MaxScholar and myOn purchased by FSF/Tax levy funds. Title III funds will be used to hire ESOL certified teachers for the Saturday Scholars Academy program. Additional funding for teacher salaries will be used from FSF/Tax Levy funds. - Program notification in parents’ preferred languages are sent home in student backpacks. The information is also posted and translated into different languages on Remind, WeChat and class websites via Google platform. In addition, we’ve purchased School Messenger, a telephone contact that notifies parents about the program in their preferred language as well. - We keep records of student attendance in school file. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our administrators, teachers and all staff working with ELLs will participate in ongoing Staff Development sessions with topics related to the Core Curriculum and effective strategies to support instruction for ELLs. ELL instructional Support Specialists, Math and Literacy Coaches and School Based Staff will conduct interactive sessions. All workshops are conducted at no-cost to program except for Teachers College. Month Topic Provider September 2018 Using the EDAT to Make Data Driven Decision ENL Coach October 2018 Launching a School-Wide Academic Vocabulary for ELLs ENL Staff November 2018 Collaborative Co-Teaching: Meeting the Needs of ELLs RBERN December 2018 Language Acquisition and Disability: ELLs in Special Education RBERN 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development January 2019 Making Texts Accessible to ELLs with Microsoft Learning tool Educational Consultant February 2019 Using Language Progressions to Design Instruction for ELLs DELLSS March 2019 Unpacking the NYSESLAT & Target of Measurements (ToMs) ENL Coach April 2019 Implementing a Response to Intervention (RtI) Model to Support ELLs' Academic Achievement RBERN May 2019 Best Practice for ELLs: Small Group Intervention TCRWP LIteracy Coach June 2019 Reading with Power and Passion DOE Literacy Coach Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 176 is a Title 1 Distinguished School with a diverse population. For the past few years, we are facing an influx of Asian and Hispanic parents in our school community. We strongly believe that parent engagement plays an important role in our children education. Our Parent Coordinator has been partnering with businesses and community-based organizations to provide fun and educational activities for the parents based on their needs through surveys and feedback from our Parent Engagement Committee. As we continue to build strong family-community ties, we also have implemented Social Emotional Learning (SEL) by developing partnerships with reThink and Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS). Our school staff, parents and other caregivers learn and practice the same emotional and interpersonal skills they are helping our children to develop. Our students who participate in the evidenced-based SEL programs have shown significant improvements in their social and interpersonal skills, and especially in their academic performance. Kindergarten Breakfast • Welcome new families into the PS 176 community • September - 1 hour • School procedures, PTA introduction, Volunteer information • PTA • Parents are notified about this event through flyers that are backpacked, e-mailed, posted on our class websites, instant text messages via WeChat and school messenger, translated primarily in the two languages (Chinese, Spanish). Spooky Night Reading • Parents and children are invited to join their teachers in readings of scary Halloween stories. Children receive flashlights and books. Great way to show kids how fun and adventurous reading can be. They can dress up and act like their favorite characters. • October 6-8 p.m. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities • Halloween Spooky Stories • PS 176 Teachers • Parents are notified about this event through flyers that are backpacked, e-mailed, posted on class websites, instant text messages via Remind, WeChat and School Messenger alerts, translated primarily in the two languages (Chinese, Spanish). Adult English Class • Parents will be provided the opportunity to learn English so that they can help their child at home. It is conducted in an informal setting, encouraging social communication through English conversation. They will be assessed on their English language skills and assign to classes based on their proficiency levels. These classes are being offered based on the parent surveys from our Parent Coordinator. • November – June on Saturdays from 9-1 pm • Basic Communication and Conversational Skills • ESOL certified teachers • Parents are notified about this class through flyers that are backpacked, e-mailed, posted on our class websites, instant text messages via Remind, WeChat and School Messenger alerts, translated primarily in the two languages (Chinese, Spanish). Reading and Writing with Your Child • Parents will be provided with the opportunity to observe demonstrations of how Readers and Writers Workshop lessons are being taught in school so that they will be able to support their child at home. • October through June (1 hour session) • Readers and Writers Workshops (Think Alouds, Stop and Jot, Turn and Talk). Small group instruction that focuses on skills and strategies based on the needs of the students. Independent reading is to have the students practice the strategies they've learned using level appropriate texts that they can read independently. • ESOL certified teachers • Parents are notified about this event through flyers that are backpacked, e-mailed, posted on our class websites, instant text messages via Remind, WeChat and School Messenger alerts, translated primarily in the two languages (Chinese, Spanish). Trip to New York Aquarium • Students and families will visit aquarium to reinforce and enrich their learning in based on Science curriculum with hands-on activities having to do with animal habitats and adaptations. • April – 4 hours • The students and their parents discover and explore a variety of animal habitats and their adaptations. They will also become familiar with the geography of the different habitats. • Parent Coordinator Parents are notified about this event through flyers that are backpacked, e-mailed, posted on our class websites, instant text messages via Remind, WeChat and School Messenger alerts, translated primarily in the two languages (Chinese, Spanish). • The trip admission and transportation will be funded by Title III funds and the required Title I SWP Parent Involvement/Engagement set-aside funding to be used. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name The Ovington School Borough Brooklyn School Number 176 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Elizabeth Culkin Coach Florence Yan/ENL ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Pam Procovas Teacher/Subject Area Katie Ginn/Sp. Ed. Teacher/Subject Area TBD/Bilingual Related-Service Provider Daniella Wahba/Speech Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Patricia Cataldo Coach Marilyn Murphy School Counselor Marianne Belmonte Parent Genevieve Mammana Parent Coordinator Deborah Francisco Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 9 0 9 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 15 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1352 Total number of ELLs 382 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.25% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 1 0 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We administer a variety of literacy assessments to gather data and inform instructional decisions for our ELLs. Fundations provides Unit Tests which measure students strength in literacy skills and concepts such as fluency, accuracy, phonemic awareness, spelling, vocabulary, word study and comprehension. TC Running Records administered in June 2018 indicates that 39% of ELLs in K-5 are at level 1, 15% of ELLs are at Level 2, 27% of ELLs are at level 3, and 19% of ELLs are at level 4. Based on the strategic data that was culled, we provide multiple pathways to monitor student results and student progress. ELL strategies are embedded in the literacy and math workshop models, such as vocabulary and picture cues, as well as TPR strategies, which is the total physical response for students to enhance their understanding. There is a strong emphasis on fluency, cadence and oral language development through songs, chants, fingerplays and tongue twisters that 2018-19 CEP 59  children enjoy as they acquire the new language in a print rich learning environment. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The literacy specialists in Grades K-5 have participated in a series of workshops on Wilson Fundations and help to turnkey training to their colleagues on the grade. In addition, the TC staff developers, Christine Holley (Grades K-2) and Alissa Levy (Grades 3-5) work with our teachers in data analysis and provide interventions for Tier 2 and Tier 3 students to meet the grade level benchmarks. Also, Marquis Studios which is a non-profit organization provides ten-week arts residencies taught by professional artists who work collaboratively with teachers to help their students to explore visual arts, theatre, music, dance architecture, circus arts and puppetry within the Core Curriculum. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL programs are evaluated by a variety of sources: - performance on the NYSESLAT in both ENL and Bilingual programs - performance on the ELL Baseline Assessment - performance on the NYS exams - TCRWP assessments - performance in English language skills compared to the NYS Standards - teacher observations - parental involvement and feedback - records on length of time from entry to transition and/or exit from the program - grades in the content areas - portfolios - graduation/promotion rates - participation in extra-curricular activities - academic performance of ELL and former ELL students compared to other students in general - monitor student progress through ongoing assessments 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the summative data which we have gathered, the leadership team members identify the trends across the grades on student strengths and the areas that they need to work on. During data analysis, teachers use the evidence of student data to share their best teaching practices with their colleagues by hosting a labsite, planning the lessons or videotaping effective strategies and analyze them together. They work collaboratively on their grade in developing an action plan to provide extra academic supports for struggling students in Tier 2 and Tier 3 within the RtI framework. The intervention has to be diagnostic in which teachers are able to specify the student learning needs. The students are purposefully grouped for targeted instruction in a timely manner based on the results of the assessment. In addition, the inquiry teams also closely monitor student progress to ensure that the struggling students demonstrate proficiency on the required skills in meeting the rigorous demands of the New York State Standards. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Response to Intervention provides a tiered instructional scaffold with multiple pathways to support student progress. Tier 1 support occurs within the classroom environment through targeted small group instruction, 1 to 1 conferring conferences, mini-lessons, and student engagement activities. Students are assessed through teacher observations, engagement activities, assessments, learning progressions, checklists and rubrics. Tier 2 supports include all of the above and an extended day program, which provides multiple cycles of intervention for student success, Across the World after- school program is specially designed for English Language Learners to support their language acquisition in all the modalities, and Saturday Scholars Academy program supports ELL language acquisition and English proficiency. Tier 3 support continues the interventions listed above with supports provided by an instructional specialist in a small group setting 1:3. At this level, 2018-19 CEP 60  students receive individualized, intensive interventions that target the students' academic needs. Students who are still not showing the level of desired progress in response to these targeted interventions are then assign to the School Assessment Team for further observations prior to a recommendation for a referral for special education services under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA 2004). Throughout the Response to Intervention process, the instructional supports are aligned to ELL strategies, TPR and a strong emphasis on oral language development. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Pending on NYS test results. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to establish high quality ENL and Chinese Bilingual programs, the ENL Coordinator shares the NYSESLAT test results with all stakeholders for the purpose of data analysis and how to leverage the information to guide their instructional practices. By identifying the common challenges or trends across the grades, teachers are able to pinpoint their students' strengths and the areas that they need more support in all modalities. As part of the Bilingual Common Core Initiative, teachers can also use the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAP) which include the five performance levels of language proficiency and the trajectory of language learning and teaching to guide their daily instruction. By having a shared vision with all stakeholders on school improvement, our teachers work collaboratively to understand what needs to be changed schoolwide to help our ELLs meet the grade level standards. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL instruction is delivered through both co-teaching model or taught by dually certified teacher in which the ELLs are grouped heterogeneously with the non-ELLs in grades K- 5. There are eight integrated ENL classes which are taught collaboratively by the certified ENL teachers and Common Branch certified teachers. There are three self-contained ENL classes which are taught by the dually certified teachers across the grades. ELLs with learning disabilities participate in these classes on the appropriate grade levels. The Stand-Alone ENL is implemented by the dually certified teachers in the self-contained ENL classes and it is also implemented by a certified ENL teacher through a pull-out or push-in model for ELLs in the ICT and Special Ed. classes. The students are grouped homogeneously according to their English language proficiency level. ELLs who scored Entering level receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL to acquire the English language needed for academic success while Transitioning or Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA from a certified ENL teacher. The Integrated ENL is implemented either through the co-teaching model or taught by a dually certified teacher. These students are grouped in mixed proficiency levels. In the co-teaching model, both teachers share their expertise in teaching the target language through the content areas. The teachers also use differentiated instruction by working in small groups to maximize student learning. ENL methodologies and academic language are used to provide scaffold for the ELLs so that they have access to the content areas while developing their academic skills and 2018-19 CEP 61  English language acquisition. b. TBE program. If applicable. There are two Chinese bilingual classes which are taught by the Common Branch certified teachers with a bilingual extension. The ELLs are grouped heterogeneously in both Kindergarten and First grades. Students' native language materials are used in the instructional program throughout the day, through Smart Board presentations of pictorial images and language, as well as songs, chants, rhymes and fingerplays to foster cultural experiences. In classroom libraries, students are able to select books in their native language. Glossaries, photos, dictionaries and iPads are used to support student language acquisition. Both Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL are implemented into daily instruction by the classroom teachers who are certified in Common Branch with a Bilingual Education extension. The bilingual students in both grades who are grouped heterogeneously in which Entering and Emerging ELLs equally receive 180 minutes for Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL instructions while Transitioning and Expanding ELLs only need 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. The teachers provide home language support for their students across the content areas to meet the high and rigorous expectations of the New York State Standards. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154 requirements for ENL and TBE programs in Grades K-8, the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to the proficiency levels in each program model listed below. Freestanding ENL program 1. Entering ELLs are entitled for 360 minutes of ENL per week, 180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. 2. Emerging ELLs are entitled for 360 minutes of ENL per week, 90 minutes of Standalone ENL, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL and the option of 90 minutes of Standalone or Integrated ENL. 3. Transitioning ELLs are entitled for 180 minutes of ENL per week, 90 minutes of Integrated ENL and 90 minutes of Standalone Integrated ENL. 4. Expanding ELLs are entitled for 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. 5. Commanding ELLs are entitled for a minimum of 90 minutes per week in small group instruction that provides rich language use, collaboration, problem solving, and targeted content-based learning. TBE program 1. Entering ELLs are entitled for 360 minutes ENL (180 minutes of Standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL), 1 class in HLA and a minimum of 2 content areas in bilingual instruction. 2. Emerging ELLs are entitled for 360 minutes ENL (90 minutes of Standalone ENL, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL and the option of 90 minutes of Standalone ENL or Integrated ENL), 1 class in HLA and a minimum of 2 content areas in bilingual instruction. 3. Transitioning ELLs are entitled for 180 minutes ENL (90 minutes of Integrated ENL, 90 minutes of Standalone ENL or integrated ENL), 1 class in HLA and a minimum of 1 content area in bilingual instruction. 4. Expanding ELLs are entitled for 180 minutes ENL, 1 class in HLA and a minimum of 1 content area in bilingual instruction. 5. Commanding ELLs are entitled for a minimum of 90 minutes per week in small group instruction that provides rich language use, collaboration, problem solving, and targeted content-based learning. 2018-19 CEP 62  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since PS 176 is a participating member of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, the components of TCRWP are put into practice in daily instruction to support our ENL/Bilingual students as they become independent readers and writers using the units of study instructional materials. As a partner with TCRWP, our school has on-site staff developers. We've invited both the TC staff developers, Christine Holley (Grades K-2) and Alissa Levy (Grades 3-5) to work directly with our ENL/Bilingual staff members to help align the ENL methodologies and strategies with Teachers College which enriches our literacy program, creating an increase in student achievement for our ELLs throughout the school year. Within a comprehensive literacy block in the Chinese bilingual classes, time is devoted to Native Language Arts (NLA) instruction using the instructional materials from China Sprout and to the development of both English language proficiency and literacy skills using the Rigby for ELLs and online reading programs such as myOn and MaxScholar. In content area instruction, English is used increasingly as the student’s proficiency grows, using ENL methodologies and scaffolding strategies to aid comprehension. Students participate in English-taught enrichment classes such as Maker Lab, Arts, Music, Dance, Science, Math, Social Studies, Language Arts, and Physical Education. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAP) provides a framework for the teachers to support their students' home language in speaking, listening, reading and writing. It also helps them to evaluate their students' home language whether they have met the academic and linguistic demands of CCLS on their grade level. In addition, student engagement activities are key to assessing the language proficiency and comprehension for ELLs. Turn and talk, a simple process used effectively, will provide insight into a child's understanding of a teaching point as well as their listening and speaking skills through accountable talks with their classmates. In a turn and talk activity, partners would speak in their native language to share their point of view. This work usually occurs in small groups of 4 students. Student book logs also provide another resource for the teacher to measure a student's proficiency measured by a checklist and rubric. In this engagement activity, the students are reading bilingual books and transferring their ideas into their native language or English which depends on their previous educational experiences. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) By using their admission and discharge history, we are able to identify the SIFE students. These students are then targeted for Title III Summer Enrichment Program where they will receive Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to help them in meeting the state learning standards in Math, English Language Arts, Social Studies and Science. In addition, students in Grades 2-5 will have the option to participate in the ELL Summer in the City Program which help to strengthen their social and academic skills in Math, Science, Reading and Writing. 5b. Newcomers We have two Freestanding ENL Kindergarten classes and one TBE for Kindergarten Chinese Bilingual students who are new arrivals to the US public school system. The emphasis for these programs is to bridge the gap between the two cultures through interactive learning experiences. Students have access to grade level texts in both their native language and English. The Total Physical Response (TPR) focus is an essential part of the programs as the children participate in a wide variety of physical experiences enriching their learning environment through music, dance, arts and creative play as well as the daily instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 63  When Newcomers arrive, the classroom teacher gives them special attention, individualizing instruction wherever applicable. Teachers pair up the new students with other students who speak their native language and have a higher level of English. In addition, students in grades 2-5 will have the option of attending the Title III ELL Summer in the City program. Entering ELLs are introduced to academic work in their new surroundings with Rigby’s Newcomer Kit, an integrated curriculum providing language, literacy and content instruction that is taught simultaneously. Technology programs such MaxScholar and myOn are being used, as well as Accelerated Reader that provides frequent progress monitoring in order to personalize reading practice based on their current reading level to improve a broad range of literacy skills from phonological awareness to comprehension. Audio books also serve as a tool to help ELLs as they tackle difficult texts or simply present an opportunity to listen to the books that they are not yet ready to read on their own. 5c,d. Other ELL Subgroups (Developing and Long Term ELLs) At PS 176, there are several ELLs in Grades 3, 4, and 5 who require an extension of services after three years in the program, due either to their special needs status or their inability to score the Commanding level on the writing component of the NYSESLAT. Students whose weakness is in reading and/or writing are offered the following support services: Accelerated Reader - Online comprehensive reading program with assessment, instructional reading, and independent practice aligning to CCLS. myOn - Online literacy program with digital books based on students' topics of interest and reading level. It also measures comprehension and track students' progress through their growth chart. MaxScholar - Online reading program which uses Orton Gillingham approach and provides students with effective reading comprehension strategies. 5e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL students who reach Commanding level on the NYSESLAT or fall into ELL exit criteria are placed the following year in a monolingual class. To support their transition to an all-English learning environment and to help them prepare for the NYS assessments, they will continue to receive ENL support in small group work such as guided reading, guided writing, vocabulary, word study, inquiry group or learning centers. The instruction focuses on targeted content-based learning with rich language to ensure that their academic and linguistic needs are met in alignment to the NYS standards. Progress monitoring will take place in a timely manner so that instruction is geared towards students' academic needs. We gather and analyze multiple data to ensure that our former ELLs perform at or above the grade level benchmarks. In addition, they are also eligible for testing accommodations to take State exams for up to two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies: - teach key words that ELLs need to know to comprehend texts - building background knowledge prior to reading the texts - differentiate instruction based on their proficiency of English language development - provide guided questioning and make texts comprehensible by dividing them into smaller sections - embedding language and content objectives to support the linguistic development of ELLs - use graphic organizers to provide visual illustrations of key terms, vocabulary, ideas, and relationships among them - encourage peer interaction with the content of the text in order to increase comprehension - giving students adequate "wait time" to process information before demanding a response - introduce and reinforce academic language in oral and written language forms 2018-19 CEP 64  - show educational video clips related to the topics - provide hands-on activities to solidify their learning experiences - use think alouds to model the thinking process and help them to develop reading comprehension skills - incorporate close reading into the instruction to ensure that our ELLs are able to determine the the central ideas or themes and notice the techniques that the author uses to convey his/her ideas. Grade-level materials: - Classroom library that contains bilingual and native language leveled books - A large selection of books with different genres and topics based on students' interests that match their reading levels with appropriate language structures and vocabulary - Content area textbooks (Foss Science, Math Terc, Passport to Social Studies) - Fundations - Orton Gillingham - The Longman Picture Dictionary in different translations - Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study & Toolkit for ELLs - Rigby-Steck Vaughn's On Our Way to English - Santillana Spotlight on English - Getting Ready for NYSESLAT and Beyond by Attanasio and Associates - Glossaries across the content areas in different translations 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We increase the amount of time our ELLs with learning disabilities who are mainstreamed into General Ed. classes with flexible scheduling and groupings to expose them to academic enrichment and social growth. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention Programs for ELLs: Based on the data we gather in the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT), we are able to target our instruction on at-risk ELLs. The following programs are offered in the English language to support our ELLs with the use of resources that correspond to their age and grade level. ELA : Saturday School Program is offered in the month of March. This program provides test prep for students, preparing students for NYS assessments. The program meets for three hours for four Saturdays. Intensive instruction for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. Students are provided with glossaries across the content areas in both English and in their native language. Across the World for ELLs (Title III) is offered from November through March. This program consists of whole and small group instruction for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE, Long-Term ELLs, two days per week for two hours per day with a focus on literacy through Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop Model. The classroom library is filled with high interest leveled books to give students the opportunity to explore a variety of topics and genres within their proficiency level both in English and in their native language. Translated dictionaries are also provided to the students to support their learning. SETSS: small group instruction for at-risk learners during the school day which may include Special Need ELLs. MaxScholar, Accelerated Readers, myOn, Mathletics and ST Math are online programs provided to ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE, and Long-Term ELLs who are given a rich diverse language experience that facilitates the transition from spoken to written language by promoting phonemic and phonological awareness skills while building and strengthening auditory 2018-19 CEP 65  processing skills through technology linked programs. TBE Chinese Bilingual Program focuses on small group instruction, one on one conferences, student engagement activities, TPR and ENL methodologies to provide multiple pathways for creative plays and experiences, Smart Board technology for photos, chants, fingerplays, and poetry to develop oral language opportunities. The students are provided with leveled books on a variety of topics and picture dictionary both in English and translated editions to support their language development. Mathematics: - ST Math is a visual math program that promotes deep mathematical understanding and sophisticated problem solving with interactive games which make learning more engaging, creative and personalized. - Mathletics supports ELLs by helping them to build math skills tailored to individual needs through international math competition online game format. - Envision Math, small groups and one-on-one instruction for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. It helps students to develop problem solving skills and strategies in differentiated levels. - Remedial Math instruction provided by the Math coach for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. This instruction is delivered through the workshop model with an emphasis on hands-on applications and strategy development in mathematical concepts. - Title III after school program, Across the World for ELLs is structured in whole and small group instruction for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. This instruction is delivered through the Readers' and Writers' workshop model with a strong emphasis on language acquisition through an integrated literacy approach using fiction and nonfiction texts. Science: - BrainPop provides a collection of animated movies in small groups and one-to-one instruction for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. It helps students to comprehend science concepts by engaging them through interactive games. - SETSS, small group instruction for at-risk learners (Special Need ELLs) the use of non-fiction literacy materials deepens students’ understanding of science themes during the day. - Related Services, one-to-one or individualized according to IEP mandates additional help in specialized areas for at-risk ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. Social Studies: - BrainPop provides animated video clips and assessments in small groups and one-to-one instruction for ELLs, Special Need ELLs, SIFE and Long-Term ELLs. It helps students to comprehend Social Studies concepts by engaging them through interactive games. - SETSS, small group instruction for Special Need ELLs, standards are met through the use of nonfiction texts and primary resources from the Library of Congress. - Related Services, one-to-one or individualized according to IEP mandates additional help in specialized areas for at-risk (Special Need ELLs) 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 66  For the upcoming school year, we will implement the Collaborative Team Teaching Model for all self-contained ENL classes across the grades to boost student achievement. ELLs will be taught by both the ESOL and Common Branch certified teachers who share their expertise for teaching culturally and linguistically diverse learners in all content areas. We will also schedule for class inter-visitations to provide teachers an opportunity to observe their colleagues for the best teaching practices in co-teaching. We will continue to offer a wide menu of online programs for students to use, such as MaxScholar, myOn, ST Math, Mathletics, and Accelerated Reader. All programs are accessible both in school and home so that our ELLs receive continuous support as they acquire the new language. We will have an In-depth training for our staff members on how to use the data to drive their instruction and provide interventions for struggling students based on their progress. We will continue to offer Family Engagement Workshops on Tuesday afternoons and family visitations to all classrooms on the first Friday of the month. We will continue updating our school website with the most current information and resources for the students and parents. We will continue to offer families access to on-line videos and on-line academic supports for students. In addition, we will host parent workshops to provide them with information on how they can support their child's learning at home. Teachers will use ClassDojo which is a digital classroom management tool to communicate effectively with parents about their child's learning in the classroom. We will continue our Professional Learning Community in which the leadership team members work collaboratively with the staff to ensure that their inquiry students meet the grade level benchmarks. We will create a digital platform to closely monitor student progress throughout the year before they fall into the learning gaps. Also, we will implement a Reading Recovery program through TCRWP to provide trainings for all paraprofessionals in literacy small group work with an emphasis on Word Study to provide the extra support for our struggling students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have any programs being discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are encouraged to participate in all school programs. The parents are provided translated letters to ensure that they understand and are aware of all the school programs made available to their children. On our school website, all information posted can be translated into 64 languages for parents to view. In addition, School Messenger sends out weekly information in native languages to all parents inviting them to participate in our school celebrations and events. Parent notification letters are sent home in the parent's preferred language to inform them about the available after school programs for their child. The Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents through phone calls and send text messages through WeChat to ensure parents return the permission slips for their child to participate in the after school programs. The following are after school programs and supplemental services offered to ELLs in our school: - Across the World for ELLs (ELL after school program) - After-school program and free family counseling offered by the Chinese-American Council (CPC), a community- based organization (CBO) - Saturday School, offered prior to city-state wide examinations, to assist in test preparation - Title III Summer School is mandated for ELLs in grades 3-5 who failed the NYS exams. - Title III ELL Summer in the City program for ELLs in grades 2-5. This program offers ELL services to the following: (a) Newcomers to the country (less than 3 years) (b) SIFE students who have had interrupted education (c) Enrichment activities for ELLs who would benefit from additional academic support. 2018-19 CEP 67  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials Used for Instruction in both the ENL and TBE Programs: Materials used by our staff consist of Teachers College Reading and Writing Project program structure. This is a comprehensive program that focuses on strategies used to strengthen analytical thinking and reading skills. Many components are considerate of English language learners’ needs that include units of study with guided reading leveled book instruction tailored to students’ language and literacy needs. Toolkit For ELLs, Fundations, Bebop books, Performance Assessments, Learning Progressions, Assessment-Based Instruction, Student Checklists, Rubrics, Leveled Writing Exemplars, Poetry, Teaching Charts, Running Records, TC paper choices. In addition, our Bilingual teachers have Big Books with CD, Guided Reading leveled books, Dictionaries and Flash Cards in Chinese to support their native language. Rigby-Steck Vaughn's On Our Way to English big books, newcomer and assessment kits, graphic organizers, and chant/concept posters . We also have The Longman Picture Dictionaries in different translations. Also there are flash cards, magnetic boards with the alphabet letters, pictures, realia, and manipulatives. Santillana Spotlight on English is a program for ELLs that teaches academic English through content-driven lessons. It is based on scientific research. The program is aligned to state ELA and the National Curriculum, and Content Area Standards. It has been created with a content-rich framework for subjects such as English Language Arts, Math, Science, Social Studies, Music and Art. Every lesson has been developed with multilevel teaching strategies for differentiated instruction, materials include big books, posters, photo cards, classroom and thematic libraries and assessments. In addition, we use Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond with the new test format by Attanasio and Associates in order to better prepare our students for the NYSESLAT in spring. In addition, each classroom has an extensive classroom library that contains bilingual and native language books leveled for appropriate and appealing book choices for ELLs. Teachers use ENL strategies such as extensive use of visuals, repetition to promote oral language development, and content area ENL instruction related to mathematics, social studies and science. All classrooms in grades K-5, as well as the ENL teachers have access to online programs such as MaxScholar, myOn, Accelerated Reader, ST Math and Mathletics to assist ELLs in Literacy and Math. We also use Quizdom integrated with our Smartboards. Quizdom has a student response component, “clickers” student teams compete in word challenges or vocabulary contests. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language Support In the TBE program, our Chinese bilingual teachers assess their student’s level of native language literacy informally, by means of teacher made assessments. Most of the students in Chinese TBE classes were born in the United States and speak either Mandarin or Cantonese at home. Only those who attend Chinese school on the weekends can read or write in their native language. The newcomers from China can both read and write in their native language on a kindergarten or first grade level. In addition, when Spanish-speaking students take the LAB-R in their native language, the results vary. We have identified one pattern. Many of the students do well on the listening and speaking portions, however, they do not perform as well on the reading and writing portions of the test. In the ENL program, native language is supported by providing access to translated word definitions through bilingual dictionaries and are accommodated with word-to-word bilingual dictionaries and glossaries for all state exams excluding the ELA. There is much practice using these materials leading to each exam. ELLs also have access to multicultural books and books of different genres in their native language to strengthen their transfer skills and aid in comprehension. Students learn English most effectively when they are able to transfer their skills in home language to English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 68  In order to meet the new CR Part 154 requirements, our school ensures that all of our ELLs receive the mandated ENL services provided by NYS certified teachers. Our staff members use ongoing data to provide targeted instruction through small groups and flexible groupings to ensure that our ELLs have equal access to the content areas based on their ages and grade levels. RtI and AIS also play important roles to support our ELLs who fall under the categories of Tier 2 and Tier 3. Our classroom libraries have high interest leveled books on different topics and genres across content areas to meet the needs of our ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The online literacy program, MaxScholar also provides ELLs with the foundation for reading by building their vocabulary and comprehension. Students receive immediate feedback based on their learning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Materials Used for Instruction in both the ENL and TBE Programs Materials used by our staff consist of Teachers College Reading and Writing Project program structure. This is a comprehensive program that focuses on strategies used to strengthen analytical thinking and reading skills. Many components are considerate of English language learners’ needs that include units of study with guided reading leveled books. The instructions are tailored to students’ language and literacy needs. The instructional materials include Bebop books, Performance Assessments, Learning Progressions, Assessment-Based Instruction, Student Checklists, Rubrics, Leveled Writing Exemplars, Poetry, Teaching Charts, Running Records papers, TC writing paper choices. In addition, our Bilingual teachers have Big Books, dictionaries and flash cards in Chinese to support their native language. Rigby-Steck Vaughn's On Our Way to English big books, newcomer and assessment kits, graphic organizers, and chant/concept posters . We also have Longman Picture Dictionaries in different translations. In addition, we also use flash cards, magnetic boards with the alphabet, pictures, realia, and manipulatives. Santillana Spotlight on English is a program for ELLs that teaches academic English through content-driven lessons. It is based on scientific research. The program is aligned to state ELA and the National Curriculum, and Content Area Standards. It has been created with a content-rich framework for subjects such as Language Arts, Math, Science, Social Studies, Music and Art. Every lesson has been developed with multilevel teaching strategies for differentiated instruction, materials include Big books, poster cut-outs, photo cards, classroom and thematic libraries and assessments. In addition, we use Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond by Attanasio and Associates in order to better prepare our students for the NYSESLAT in spring. In addition, each classroom has an extensive classroom library that contains bilingual and native language books leveled for appropriate and appealing book choices for ELLs. Teachers use ENL strategies such as extensive use of visuals, repetition to promote oral language development, and content area ENL instruction related to mathematics, social studies and science. All classrooms in grades K-5, as well as the ENL teachers have access to online resources such as MaxScholar, Accelerated Reader, myOn, ST Math and Mathletics to assist ELLs in Literacy and Math. We also use Quizdom integrated with our Smartboards. Quizdom has a student response component, “clickers” student teams compete in word challenges or vocabulary contests. The Microsoft learning tool, Immersive Reader helps ELLs to build fluency by having the text read aloud and break it into syllables. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We believe that a good way to help newly enrolled ELLs feel welcome and prepared for success in school is to give them a school tour and present them with a "Welcome Kit". This packet is comprised of pertinent school information such as the school's policies, school website, school messenger, calendar, supplies, bussing and lunch information. The parent coordinator informs the parents about this event through phone calls, letters, emails and text messages via WeChat. Throughout the school year, we offer several activities for our new ELLs which are taught by the ENL and Common Branch certified teachers on the following: 2018-19 CEP 69  - Workshop Model in Literacy & Math with flexible grouping (small group and one-on-one conferencing) - After School Programs - Across the World for ELLs (2x per week for 90 minutes each from 2:30-4:00 pm, October-March) - Online computer instruction (MaxScholar, Accelerated Reader, myOn, ST Math, Mathletics) 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development and Support for School Staff Our administrators, teachers, related service providers, and paraprofessionals will participate in an ongoing Staff Development sessions with topics related to ELLs such as Blueprint for ELLs' Success, New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP), Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAP), EDAT, Effective Strategies in Teaching ELLs across the Content Areas and Research-Based Strategies to Address the Academic and Linguistic Demands for ELLs. ELL Instructional Support Specialists, Math and Literacy Coaches and School-Based Staff will conduct interactive sessions. Professional Development for ENL & Bilingual Teachers In order to meet the specific learning needs of our ELLs, we will: - use ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to identify at-risk ELLs and provide interventions. - incorporate Bilingual Common Core Initiataive (BCCI) Progressions into instruction. - provide important resources to help teachers identifying and working with ELLs with learning differences and disabilities. - view and discuss the video clips (DELLSS, Teaching Channel, ASCD, EngageNY, ISTE) to empower teachers to self-reflect on their teaching practices, student work and to see evidence of their own progress. - actively involve and engage teachers to work collaboratively in developing scaffolds for ELLs in lesson planning aligned to the TCRWP Units of Study. - provide opportunities for teachers to visit the lab sites that support best practices. - invite the staff to attend ENL institute at Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Calendar Days. - invite the staff to attend ENL workshops which are offered by the DELLSS, Fordham University & Borough Field Support Center throughout the school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 70  In order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for TBE/ENL teachers receive specific professional development, the following sessions will be offered to all teachers. September 2018 Using the EDAT tool to Make Data Driven Decision October 2018 Launching a School-wide Academic Vocabulary for ELLs November 2018 Collaborative Co-Teaching: Meeting the Needs of ELLs December 2018 ELLs in Special Education: Language Acquisition vs. Disability January 2019 Making Texts Accessible to ELLs with Microsoft Learning Tools February 2019 Using Language Progressions to Design Instruction for ELLs March 2019 Unpacking the NYSESLAT & Target of Measurements (ToMs) April 2019 Implementing a Response to Intervention (RtI) Model to Support ELLs' Academic Achievement May 2019 Best Practices for ELLs: Small Group Intervention June 2019 Reading with Power & Passion We keep records of the professional development activities in both the school files and the ENL binder to keep track of the mandated hours that teachers need to earn for their NYS certifications renewal. Records include the following: 1. Agendas showing the type of activity, location, duration, sponsoring organization, instructor or presenter’s name. 2. Attendance in the form of completion certificates or other relevant documents supporting the evidence of attendance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas during Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons. Interpretation and translation are provided by utilizing over-the-phone interpreters via the Translation and Interpretation Unit, Microsoft Translator tool as well as in-house by school staff. During these meetings, our ENL/Bilingual staff members explain to the parents about the goals of the program which their child has been enrolled for the school year. When parents have a better understanding of their child’s program, they are more involved in helping their child to meet the goals. Teachers also share and discuss with the parents about their child’s progress in language proficiency using the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT results to identify their strengths and areas that their child needs to improve in the four modalities (speaking, listening, reading, writing). In addition, both the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAPs) and the Home Language Arts Progressions (HLAPs) are another great resources that our staff members share with the parents about how to support their child in meeting the linguistic demands and the trajectory of language learning across the five levels of language proficiency. The Performance Level Descriptions (PLDs) also provides a framework of the knowledge and skills that their child needs to demonstrate in order to move to the next proficiency level. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement in their child's education is an essential key to student achievement. Our Parent Coordinator pays particular attention to ELL parents, especially newcomers to the NYC public school system. The parent coordinator and other school staff members endeavor to create a welcoming atmosphere by providing parents with translated posters and important brochures regarding the resources in our school community. In addition, parents are always notified about our school events through flyers that are backpacked, e-mailed and/or posted on Remind, WeChat and class websites using Google platform which can be translated different languages. Additionally, parents are invited to participate in the monthly Art and 2018-19 CEP 71  Craft workshops which will be offered for 2 hour sessions throughout the school year. In order to facilitate the transition from elementary school to middle school, our guidance counselor makes the arrangement for school tours in late Spring and provides important information regarding graduation requirements and community resources for the ELL parents who are in need of social, emotional and academic support. In cooperation with the ENL/Bilingual teachers and other staff, parent orientation meetings are held in the fall and periodically throughout the year as new students arrive. The ENL coordinator conducts a series of workshops on how to navigate their child's class website and gain access to the educational resources. Parents are also invited to participate in the NYSESLAT training so that they can have a better understanding of the test components and help to prepare their child for the test. They are also being invited to their child's classroom for Author celebrations and observe Teachers College Readers and Writers Workshops on the first Friday of each month. The Parent Engagement committee hosts an ongoing parent workshops to support our families in helping their child's learning at home. We also offer monthly parent book clubs to assist parents in learning the reading strategy development for their child by using Kindles and iPads. The ENL Adult Class which is sponsored by the DOE is being offered on Saturdays for 4 hours sessions throughout the school year to support their language acquisition through interactive activities. PS 176 prides itself on building strong partnerships with families to boost student performance. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Elizabeth Culkin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Ovington School School DBN: 20K176 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Elizabeth Culkin Title Principal Patricia Cataldo Assistant Principal Deborah Francisco Parent Coordinator Pam Procovas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Genevieve Mammana Parent Katie Ginn/Sp. Ed. Teacher/Subject Area TBD/Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Florence Yan Marilyn Murphy Coach Coach Marianne Belmonte School Counselor Karina Costantino Lucia Perez-Medina Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member District 20 ELL Liaison Siobhan Funaro Other Assistant Principal Rebecca Hughes Other Special Ed. Teacher Daniella Wahba Other Speech Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 2018-19 CEP 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K176 School Name: The Ovington School Superintendent: Karina Costanti The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Florence Yan ENL Coach Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs, we analyzed information from ATS reports, Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), and emergency blue card information. For those families without this information in ATS, we also sent home the parent language preference form that was made available on the Department of Education website and then updated ATS to indicate parent preferences. Based on the results received from these sources, a master list of all home languages was created. This list not only provided information about the entire school population, but it also allowed us to breakdown the data by class and grade. Through close analysis, we were able to determine the specific translation and interpretation needs so parents could be provided with appropriate information in the language that they understand best. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 75  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 9 82 1 2 1 631 0 6 1 0 1047 21 18 1 426 2 19 2 2 Albanian Arabic Bambara Burmese Cham Chinese Cantonese Hungarian Italian Mandarin English Polish Russian Slovak Spanish Turkish Urdu Uzbek Vietnamese 0.27 0.06 0.03 0.06 0.03 0.45 0 0.18 0.03 0 0.75 0.63 0.54 0.03 0.30 0.06 0.57 0.06 0.06 9 92 1 2 5 631 182 6 1 449 1012 21 18 2 430 2 19 2 2 0.27 0.07 0.03 0.06 0.15 0.45 0.13 0.18 0.03 0.32 0.72 0.6 0.54 0.06 0.31 0.06 0.57 0.06 0.06 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Half-Day Dismissal November Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We send out parent notification letters in their preferred language which are translated by the DOE's 2018-19 CEP 76  March June Parent Workshops September - June School Events - Spooky Reading Night - Pumpkin Patch - Family Game Night - Cinema Under the Stars September - June - Winter & Spring Concerts - Maker Faire - Spring Dance Festival - Graduations Gifted & Talented NYS ELA NYSESLAT NYS Math NYS Science January March April May May Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate messages into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive the notification in a timely manner. We send out flyers in parents' preferred language which are translated by our school staff or the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate messages into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive the invitations in a timely manner. We send out flyers in parents' preferred language which are translated by our school staff or the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate messages into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive the invitations in a timely manner. We send out parent notification letters in their preferred language which are translated by the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate messages into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, 2018-19 CEP 77  After School Programs October Saturday Scholars Academy March Summer School - Title III June - ELL Summer in the City we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive the testing dates in a timely manner. We send out the application form and acceptance letter in parents' preferred language which are translated by the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive all the information in a timely manner. We send out the application form and acceptance letter in parents' preferred language which are translated by the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate messages into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive all the information in a timely manner. We send out the flyer, application form and acceptance letter in parents' preferred language which are translated by the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. In addition, we also post the information on our class websites via Google platform as well as Remind which can translate messages into 80 or more languages. With School Messenger, we are able to reach the parents to ensure that they receive all the information in a timely manner. 2018-19 CEP 78  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September Parent-Teacher Conferences November March Evening Parent-Teacher Conferences Parent Engagement PTA Meetings September May September - June (Tuesdays) September -June interpretation service(s)? Interpretation is provided through over-the-phone interpreter services via the Translation & Interpretation Unit or school staff members. Interpretation and translation services are provided through the DOE-Contracted Vendors or school staff members. We also use Microsoft Translator tool on iPad to communicate with our parents in their preferred language. Interpretation is provided through over-the-phone interpreter services via the Translation & Interpretation Unit or school staff members. Interpretation is provided through over-the-phone interpreter services via the Translation & Interpretation Unit or school staff members. School staff members or parent volunteers. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we will send out School Messenger alerts to the parents in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 79  In order to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the available resources to meet state compliance, our school will host a faculty conference to disseminate the information on how to communicate effectively with all English Language Learners (ELL) parents. We will provide all staff members with information regarding the over-the-phone interpretation services (200 languages) and translation services which are offered by the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit. All teachers will have the updated information about parents' preferred language of communication on the Blue Emergency Card and in ATS. We always ensure that important documents are translated and sent home so that parents can participate in their child's education. We will also provide our staff members with a copy of the multilingual signage to help them identify the parents' preferred language of communication. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 176 always ensure that we are in compliance by fulfilling Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services. Parents are provided with a copy of Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities stating their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. The Multilingual signage and Achieve NYC posters are also posted at the school main entrance in languages that parents can understand. The security guards and the secretaries in the main office have the Language Identification Guide and Translation & Interpretation informational brochure for the parents as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through parent surveys, our school will gather feedback from ELL parents concerning the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services that our school has provided for them. The Parent Coordinator utilizes a database of parent email addresses and contact information in which she corresponds with parents to obtain their feedback and suggestions on improving the language services they receive. Based on their feedback, the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will implement the changes and closely monitor its effectiveness to have a better communication with the parents. 2018-19 CEP 80 
