2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 21K177 School Name: P.S. 177 THE MARLBORO Principal: ANN MARIE LETTIERI BAKER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Marlboro 332100010177 School Number (DBN): 21K177 Pre Kindergarten – Grade 5 346 Avenue P Brooklyn, New York 11204 (718) 375-9506 Phone Number: Ann Marie LettieriBaker (718) 375-4450 Fax: alettieribaker2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Ann Marie Lettieri Baker Antonella Lombardo Aileen Echeandia Daniella LaMalfa Angela Naranjo n/a n/a n/a District Information Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue Brooklyn, New York 11236 idimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 648-0209 Phone Number: n/a Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauriciere Degovia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-4872 Phone Number: n/a Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Ann Marie Lettieri Baker Antonella Lombardo AileenEcheandia Connie Termini Angela Naranjo n/a n/a n/a Jennifer Resciniti Betty Silverstone IwonaRusin Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Teacher (Chairperson) Teacher Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TurkhanKeller Regina Korochik Eva Velez Brittany Garcia n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected Parent n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S. 177 is to instill a lifelong love of learning and to foster self-esteem in every child. In addition, we strive to work with parents to develop the social, emotional and educational needs of all children so that they will be able to meet the challenges of their future college and career aspirations. We feel that literacy is the fundamental skill 2018-19 CEP 9  in a well-rounded education, and is essential in order for children to become contributing citizens of our communities, country and world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Marlboro School, Public School 177, is an elementary school with 980 students from PK through grade 5. The school population comprises 1% Black, 31% Hispanic, 36 % White, 30% Asian and 1% American Indian or Alaskan Native students. The student body includes 32% English language learners and 16% special education students. Boys account for 48 % of the students enrolled and girls account for 52%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 94.3%. Public School 177 is a unique school community committed to high expectations for the academic achievement, social development, and personal growth of each student. We embrace diversity by nurturing strengths and talents to educate the whole child. Strengthened by the commitment of our parent community, we value their participation and are dedicated to developing a strong partnership between home and school. We believe that our ultimate goal of academic success for each student at Public School 177 will be realized through support from the parent community and through meaningful and appropriate teacher training through professional development opportunities. A culture of respect, acceptance, and understanding celebrates differences and serves as the foundation of our school community. PS 177 is a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project School for comprehensive literacy instruction. The Teachers College professional learning model includes grade level meetings and grade level lab site visits whereupon specific strategies and pedagogy are modeled by the Teachers College Staff Developers and then practiced by the classroom teachers. In addition, teachers attend professional learning opportunities offered by Teachers College. We are a Go Math and Exemplars school. Computation, joined with problem solving, provides our learners with rich opportunities to not only understand the algorithms associated with what they are learning, but with the concepts behind the algorithms, as well. Our children's unique needs and talents are developed so that they will acquire the knowledge and skills needed for citizenship, college and career, lifelong learning and competent living. Our school challenges students with enrichment programs in the arts that include: theater, visual arts, chorus, concert band, cadet band, media arts and dance. The school prides itself on being a culture where students feel safe and supported by their teachers and peers. We are a NYU Positive Behavioral Intervention Strategies (PBIS) school. As such, we implement a L.I.G.H.T. Program. L.I.G.H.T. promotes positive behavior throughout the school through character value lessons and assemblies. Parents play a significant role in the PS 177 community. The PTA is active in helping plan fun and engaging activities for students and families both during, as well as, after school. The PTA provides activities that are responsive to school needs. Parent engagement is at the heart of our school community. Parents are frequently invited to celebrate academic achievement and actively participate in student learning in their child’s classroom. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  The student body includes 32% English language learners and 16% special education students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Celebration ● Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the New York State Common Core Learning Standards ● A commitment to the arts. ● Structures that foster positive and inclusive learning environments. ● A culture of learning that communicates high expectations with appropriate academic supports and scaffolds so every learner may be successful. 2018-2019 Instructional Focus Our focus this year is to articulate specific expectations for student learning and progress and to plan and incorporate strategies in our pedagogy that will result in student success. This will be realized through: 1. Student goal setting in Literacy (Reading and Writing) 2. Gathering and analyzing evidence of student learning across each unit (Reading, Writing and Mathematics) Incorporating a “Writing About Reading” component into each Reading unit in order to see more concrete 3. evidence of student learning Our essential pedagogical questions that must be asked and addressed across each unit of study are: 1. What evidence do I have that supports student learning? 2. What does my data reveal? 3. How am I holding myself accountable for the growth of each student in my class? 4. How am I holding my learners accountable for their own growth? 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K177 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1022 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 27 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 66 51 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 73.9% % Reduced Lunch 33.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.6% 31.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 36.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 95 96 1 93.9% 1.4% 16.1% 0.7% 29.8% 1.9% 6 8% 9.3 47.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A NO N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Goal: By June 2018, 40% of all Transitioning and Expanding English as a new language learners, grades Kindergarten - grade 5, and all students with disabilities, grades Kindergarten - grade 5, will achieve their reading level goals as measured by the TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) running record assessments. 2017-2018 Data for Transitioning and Expanding ENLs: Grade 3-4 Level Movement 5+ Level Movement % At Benchmark Level 3+ K 1 (49 s) 2 (43 s) 3 (32 s) 4 (28 s) 5 (26 s) 0 24% 56% 47% 32% 27% 0 67% 35% 32% 68% 8% 0 37% 49% 12.5% 21% 15% 2018-19 CEP 13  All (169 s) 41% 48% 31% This goal was achieved on grades 1 and 4. NYS ELA Item Skills Analysis Grade 5: Overall, the writing scores were mostly above average. The top 3 vs. City are: Drawing on Information (Inf. Text) above the city by 9% Reasons and Evidence (inf. Text) above the city by 9% Theme (lit.) above the city by 7% Overall, the reading portion fell below average when compared to the city average. The lowest 3 vs. City are: Theme (lit.) below the city by -8% Drawing on Information (inf. text) below the city by -7% Explain Structure (lit.) below the city by -11% Grade 4: Overall, the writing scores were mostly above average. The Top 3 vs. The City are: Word Meaning (overall reading) Theme (lit. writing) Word Meaning (lit. writing) Although most of the reading scores fell below average, most of them were only by -1% The 3 lowest vs. City are: Word Meaning (lit.) by -7% Interpreting Information (inf. Text) by -7% Point of View (lit.) by -1% Describe Element (lit. by -1% Main Idea (inf. Text) by -1% Grade 3: Although many sections overall fall below average, these are the top 3 vs City: Word Meaning (reading overall) by -5% Illustrations (lit. reading) by -5% Analyze Events (lit.) by -5% Refer to Parts (writing) by -5% Analyze Events (lit.) by 4% Overall, most sections were below average. These are the lowest 3 vs City: Locate Information (inf. Text) by -10% Central Message by -10% 2018-19 CEP 14  Illustrations (inf. Writing) by -16% State test score results: 2017 % Proficient (all students) = 39% 2018 % Proficient (all students) = 47% 2017 Students with disabilities - 6% 2018 Students with disabilities = 13% 2017 ELLs = 6% 2018 ELLs = 16% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all students, grades 3-5, will reach proficiency in their ability to draw meaning from, interpret and locate information from expository text as measured by writing about reading tasks. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). (a) TCRWP units of study will be implemented, using workshop model pedagogy, in Reading and Writing for all students, grades K-5. (b) Literacy Coach will meet with teachers of grades 3, 4 and 5 monthly to analyze student work and plan small group instruction based on said analysis Teachers will receive 15 days of Professional Learning provided by a TC Staff Developer Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, grades 3-5 September-June Classroom Teachers Literacy Coach, Classroom Teachers Classroom teachers September-June Literacy Coach, APs In cycles September - June TCRWP Staff Developer, Literacy Coach, Principl and APs September - June Literacy Coach, Principal, APs Selected teachers will participate at full days of professional learning at TC in order to refine their practice in the area of Writing Selected teachers September - June Literacy Coach, Principal, APs Common planning time will be embedded in each teacher's program in order for teachers to meet and plan across the units of study (c) ICT classrooms will be structured to reduce class size and provide targeted, scaffolded instruction based on students' needs All teachers All teachers September-June Teachers, APs, Principal, Literacy Coach, IEP Teacher 2018-19 CEP 16  Parallel team teaching will be the method of delivery for all Transitioning and Expanding students for the mini lessons embedded in the Writing units of study. Parallel team teaching will be the method of delivery for all students with disabilities whose programming includes SETSS for the mini lessons embedded in the Writing units of study. Classroom teachers, ESL teachers September - June September-June Classroom Teachers, ESL Teachers, APs, Principal, Literacy Coach Classroom teachers, SETSS providers, APs, Principal, Literacy Coach, IEP teacher Classroom teachers, SETSS providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Classroom teachers, ENL Providers, the Academic Coaches, the AIS Provider and the Parent Coordinator will provide five (5) workshops across the school year on topics selected by parents based on the results of a Parent Survey to be distributed and results tabulated in October 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TCRWP Contract to include: One K-2 Staff Developer and a Grades 3-5 Staff Developer; 50 Calendar Days for classroom teachers, 8 calendar days for the Literacy Coach, specialty groups for four (4) selected teachers and 8 calendar days for the Principal  AIS for selected students  Departmental programming on grade five to include small ICT groupings in two of the five grade five sections  Daily common planning time for all teachers Grades Kindergarten - Grade 5 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019: The comprehension component of the TCRWP Running Record Assessments (3-5) will be used to determine if students are making adequate progress toward achieving the targeted percentage of 75%. Additionally, student notebooks will be analyzed using a teacher-developer rubric, to determine written comprehension of expository texts. By January 2019, 37% of all students, grades 3-5, will demonstrate the ability to draw meaning from, interpret and locate information from expository text as measured by writing about reading tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) May 2019: TCRWP Running Record Assessments (3-5) and task analysis. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 2017-2018 Goal: By June 2018, 100% of all students referred through the PPT process will receive a formal RTI plan and appropriate Academic Intervention services including cycles of AIS for literacy and/or mathematics resulting in 85% of all students referred through the PPT achieving their reading level goals as measured by the TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) running record assessments. Summary: 28 students were brought to the PPT for consideration – all 28 had an RTI plan developed by the RTI coordinator, the IEP teacher and classroom teachers 14 received 1-2 cycles of AIS in Literacy as part of their PPT/RTI plan 10/14 achieved their reading level goals, or, 71%. We fell short of this goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide academic intervention services (AIS) , which will result in a 9% increase from 71% to 80% in the percentage of students referred through the PPT process meeting their reading level goals as measured by TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) running record assessments. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (a) LLI (Leveled Literacy Intervention) will be used to support students in grades 1-5 who were referred through the PPT process as part of their RTI plans. Students Grades 1-5 3-4 periods per week AIS Providers, SBST and IEP Teacher Small group, targeted instruction (a component of Workshop Model pedagogy) will be planned based on each classroom teacher's formative and summative analysis of students' progress in Reading, Writing and Mathematics. Students Grades 1-5 The PPT will meet bi-monthly to review the progress of each student with an IEP and address strategies for improvement. The AIS Coordinator and team will meet bi-monthly to analyze the classroom data of each student referred through the PPT process in order to develop an RTI plan and to discuss the progress of each student as said plans are being implemented. (b) Small group, targeted instruction (a component of Workshop Model pedagogy) will be planned based on each classroom teacher's formative and summative analysis of students' progress in Reading, Writing and mathematics. SBST AIS Staff Students Grades 2-5 Daily in reading, writing and mathematics Classroom teachers, IEP teachers, ENL teachers, Coaches, Administrative Cabinet SBST, Principal, Classroom teachers, APs Bi-monthly across the school year Bi-monthly across the school year AIS Coordinator, AIS Teachers, Administrative Cabinet Daily in reading, writing and mathematics AIS Providers, AP for Special Education, SBST and IEP Teacher, Classroom teachers, IEP teachers, ENL teachers, Coaches, APs and Principal 2018-19 CEP 20 (c) Principal will continue to meet with parents and caregivers the last Friday of each month for "Last Friday" conversations to include specific supports for assisting their children at home. Families Grades Pre K-5 One period each month Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Classroom teachers, ENL Providers, the Academic Coaches, the AIS Provider and the parent Coordinator will provide five (5) workshops across the school year on topics selected by parents based on the results of a Parent Survey to be distributed and results tabulated in September 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TCRWP Contract to include: One K-2 Staff Developer and a Grades 3-5 Staff Developer; 50 Calendar Days for classroom teachers, 8 calendar days for the Literacy Coach, specialty groups for four (4) selected teachers and 8 calendar days for the Principal  AIS for selected students  Departmental programming on grade five to include small ICT groupings in two of the five grade five sections  Daily common planning time for all teachers Grades Kindergarten - Grade 5 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring built into the LLI system, in conjunction with TCRWP running record results, will be used to determine whether or not the intervention provided has narrowed the achievement gap for targeted students resulting in continuing services or the provisioning of additional supports and interventions. By January 2019, 45% of students referred through the PPT process will meet their reading level goals as measured by TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) running record assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. LLI data; TCRWP data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Goal: By June 2018, through professional collaboration and inquiry, effective pedagogical practice in mathematics will result in 65% of all students, grades Kindergarten-5, achieving practitioner or higher performance as measured by Exemplars problem-solving tasks. Schoolwide (K-5) data as measured by the May end-of-year Exemplars assessment: Novice 14% Apprentice 17% Practitioner 53% Expert 16% This goal was achieved. 2018 NYS Math Data (Grades 3-5): Grade 5: Overall, the grade did above average in most sections. The top 3 vs. City are: Volume with Unit Cubes exceeded the City by 6% Compare Decimals by 6% Division: 2 Digit Divisor by 7% The lowest 3 vs. City are: Fraction Measurement fell below the City by -8% Place Value by -17% Grade 4: The top 3 vs. City are: Fraction Measurement exceeded the City by 6% Use Protractor by 11% 2018-19 CEP 22  Fraction as Multiple by 8% The lowest 3 vs. City are: Draw Lines and Angles fell below the City by -7% Definition of Degree by -8% Understand Angle Addition by -7% Grade 3: The top 3 vs. City are: Partition Shapes exceeded the City by 7% Time Problems by 9% Understand Equal Fraction by 3% Overall, the grade did below average in most sections. The lowest 3 vs. City are: Volume and Mass fell below the City by -12% Understand Area by -12% 1/b on Number Line by -13% Numbers as Fractions -20% 2018 NYS Mathematics Results: 2017 % proficient (all students) = 42% 2018 $ proficient (all students) - 48% 2017 SWDs = 10% 2018 SWDs = 17% 2017 ELLs = 18% 2018 ELLS = 19% Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through professional collaboration and inquiry, effective pedagogical practice in mathematics will result in 65% of all students, grades 1-5, achieving Practitioner level performance in problem solving as measured by end-of-year Exemplars assessments. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (a) 1. All teachers, K-5, will align Exemplars problems to their Go Mathematics units of study and use Exemplars problems as summative assessments of students' problem solving abilities. Students, Grades K-5 Two per unit Teaching staff, Math Coach, AP, Principal 2. Teachers will work with Math Coach to analyze data to inform unit planning and small group, targeted instruction. Students, Grades K-5 Teaching staff, Math Coach, AP, Principal Math Coach, APs Monthly common planning time 4 periods per week in 6-8 week cycles (b) Math Coach will use her AIS periods to work with targeted, sub-group students in grades 2-4 inclusive of students with disabilities and English as new language learners. ENLs and SWD's Grades 2-4 (c) Math Coach and teachers will plan and implement two (2) Exemplars workshops for parents to be executed in the Fall and in the Spring during Parent Engagement. Parents Fall /Spring Math Coach, Faculty, APs, Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Classroom teachers, ENL Providers, the Academic Coaches, the AIS Provider and the parent Coordinator will provide five (5) workshops across the school year on topics selected by parents based on the results of a Parent Survey to be distributed and results tabulated in September 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Math Coach  AIS Coordinator  Departmental programming on grade five to include small ICT groupings in two of the five grade five sections. 2018-19 CEP 24   Daily common planning time for all teachers Grades Kindergarten - Grade 5. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Exemplars mid-year benchmark assessment. By January 2019, 37% of all students, grades 1-5, are applying their understanding of problem solving when engaged with multi-step problems as measured by Exemplars assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Exemplars end-of-year assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Goal: By June 2018, through established structures that support cycles of learning, 60% of all students in grades 2-5 will achieve grade level standards in writing as measured by TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) on-demand, end-of-unit assessments. Analysis: 52% of all 2nd graders achieved grade level standards 55% of grade 3rd graders achieved grade level standards 58% of grade 4th graders achieved grade level standards 53% of grade 5th graders achieved grade level standards Rendering an average of 54% achieving grade level standards in Writing. This percentage is inclusive of SWDs and ENL Learners. Although this goal was 6% under the projection, I still feel this goal was achieved as all students in grades 1-5 demonstrated growth in writing in both fiction, as well as, in nonfiction as measured by TCRWP pre and post unit assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Coaches and Teachers College Staff Developers, in conjunction with school leaders, will provide teachers with appropriate cycles of professional learning which will result in a 6% increase in all students, grades K-5), 2018-19 CEP 26  from 54% to 60%, achieving grade level standards in writing as measured by a comparative analysis within the same genre using TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) on-demand, end-of-unit assessments. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (a) TCRWP units of study will be implemented, using workshop model pedagogy, in Reading and Writing for all students, grades K-5. Students, Grades K-5 2 periods daily Principal, Aps, Coaches Monthly 1. Principal, APs and Coaches will meet weekly to plan PL opportunities around best practices in student engagementm, self and peer assessment. 2. Parallel Teaching will be the primary method of instruction in the ICT classrooms in order to reduce class size and address students' IEP instructional goals. SWDs Principal, APs, TC Staff Developers, ELA Coach Principal, APs, Coaches, Classroom teachers, AIS providers Daily Classroom teachers, Principal, APs Classroom teachers, Principal, APs, ELA Coach Title III After school program Daily October-Maty 3. Data-drive, small-group, targeted instruction will be used to address the needs of individual learners. SWDs 4. Title III after school programming will focus on each strand of the NYSESLAT inclusive of writing. ENLs (c) 1. Teachers will plan and execute five parent workshops over the course of the school year, one of which will describe the writing units of study. Parents/ Caregivers Across the year Principal/APs/Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 28 2. Principal will host monthly "Last Friday" meetings to discuss parents' concerns and provide parents opportunities to visit their child(ren)'s classrooms and participate in their learning. 3. Parents will be invited to end-of-unit Writing "publishing" parties and other academic celebrations. Across the year Principal Principal/APs/Parent Coordinator After each unit (6x) across the year Parents/ Caregivers Parents/ Caregivers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Classroom teachers, ENL Providers, the Academic Coaches, the AIS Provider and the parent Coordinator will provide five (5) workshops across the school year on topics selected by parents based on the results of a Parent Survey to be distributed and results tabulated in October 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  TCRWP Contract to include: One K-2 Staff Developer and a Grades 3-5 Staff Developer; 50 Calendar Days for classroom teachers, 8 calendar days for the Literacy Coach, specialty groups for four (4) selected teachers and 8 calendar days for the Principal  AIS for selected students  Departmental programming on grade five to include small ICT groupings in two of the five grade five sections  Daily common planning time for all teachers Grades Kindergarten - Grade 5  Title III After school program  Saturday Academy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019: TCRWP on demand post unit writing assessments will be used to determine if students are making adequate progress toward achieving the targeted percentage of 60% at or above Grade level. 2018-19 CEP 29  By January 2019, 30% of all students in grades K-5 will achieve grade level standards in writing as measured by a comparative analysis within the same genre using TCRWP (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project) on-demand, end-of-unit assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP on demand assessment analysis Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Goal: By June 2018, through effective family engagement outreach and support efforts, 40% of all English as a new language learners (Grades Kindergarten-5) will score within the Expanding/Commanding proficiency levels of the NYSESLAT. Grade K 1 2 3 4 5 Number 47/77 17/69 45/72 24/52 41/51 32/46 Percent 61 25 62 46 80 69.5 Total: 206/367 56.1% - This goal was achieved. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through effective family out reach and support efforts 75% of all English as a new language learners (Grades K-5) will achieve their individual learning targets thereby, scoring within the Expanding/Commanding proficiency levels of the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (a) All staff will use Google Translate when creating documents to be "backpacked" and will upload Google Translate onto their ipads in order to quickly communicate with parents during face-to-face meetings. Families Ongoing Principal, APs, Technology Teacher (b) Title III funds will be used to provide academic support services to entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding students through afterschool programming. Targeted ENL learners October- May ENL Coordinator, Principal, Title III afterschool teachers (c) On Our Way to English will be purchased as the research-based program for stand alone service for entering and emerging students. Entering and emerging ENLs September-June AP, ENL Coordinator and ENL teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Classroom teachers, ENL Providers, the Academic Coaches, the AIS Provider and the parent Coordinator will provide five (5) workshops across the school year on topics selected by parents based on the results of a Parent Survey to be distributed and results tabulated in October2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title III funds will be used for afterschool programming. All staff will be provided with ipads Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 32  Title III program benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Title III program end-of-program assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Level 1 performance on TCRWPrunning record assessments 2.6-3.2 performance on the NYSELAexam (Grades 3-5) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fountas and PinnellLLI(Leveled LiteracyIntervention) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group Instruction During the school day Mathematics Novice performance on Exemplars tasks Focused Test Preparation Repeated tasks Small Group Instruction Small group instruction Saturday Academy During the school day Science 2.6-3.2 performance on the NYSMathematics exam (Grades 3-5) Level 1 performance onTCRWPnon fiction running record assessments 2.6-3.2 performance on theNYSELAexam (Grades 3-5) Focused test preparation FountasandPinnellLLI(Leveled LiteracyIntervention) Small group instruction Small Group Instruction Saturday Academy During the school day 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies Level 1 performance onTCRWPnon fiction running record assessments 2.6-3.2 performance on theNYSELAexam (Grades 3-5) Focused Test Preparation FountasandPinnellLLI(Leveled LiteracyIntervention) Small Group Instruction Small Group Instruction Saturday Academy During the school day Focused Test Preparation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Identified through the PPTand RTI processes At risk services to include: at risk SETSS, and at-risk Counseling Small Group Instruction 1:1 or small group Saturday Academy During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 42 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funding will be used to purchase backpacks, supplies and all materials the children need throughout the school year in order to be successful in school. Clothing including coats for the winter months will be purchased, as well. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. School leaders will provide opportunities for professional development to ensure growth based upon feedback from the cycles of observation using Danielson’s Framework. 2. Administrators will guide teachers to form an individual development plan with delineated steps for improvement. 3. Workshops will be conducted to build teacher capacity to incorporate evaluative feedback to increase the effectiveness of their instruction. 4. School leaders will provide opportunities for teachers who have been identified as highly effective to share best practices to increase effectiveness in the classroom and build capacity. 5. Mentors will be assigned to support new teachers 6. The secretary will work closely with our Borough Field Support HR point person to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment guidelines. 7. The Principal and Assistant Principals will ensure that all teaching assignments match teachers' licenses areas. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals and other staff members that will enable all students to meet the CCSS will include the following: 1) Teacher-led inquiry 2) TCRWP professional learning led by staff developers from Columbia University (30 days contracted) 3) TCRWP calendar days to be attended by teachers (50 days contracted) 2018-19 CEP 38  4) TCRWP specialty groups to be attended by teachers (3 groups contracted) 5) TCRWP Principal professional learning (year-long study contracted) 6) UFT contracted Monday afternoon cycles of professional learning led by the ELA and Math Coaches 7) Monthly participation in the D21/D22 Continuous Learning project focusing on ENL inquiry (Principal, AP and Coaches) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The transition plan implemented to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary programs begins by immersing them in a unit of study in June to prepare them for Kindergarten. This unit includes lessons that help them process their feelings about leaving pre-k and moving on to kindergarten. Students learn about the similarities and the differences between Pre-K and Kindergarten. As part of our transition plan to assist preschool children and their parents we provide an orientation workshop given by the Pre-K social worker on the June prior to their entrance into Kindergarten. We invite new students as well as returning Pre-K students. Children have the opportunity to experience the classroom environment, sift through books, draw and socialize. Parents are provided with a summary of the curriculum and are encouraged to take a tour of the building and meet the staff. The school social worker, family worker, teachers, paraprofessionals and assistant principals work as a collaborative team to assist in the transition from the students and their families. The workshops facilitated by the family worker and social worker with topics relevant to transitioning, with a focus on the social-emotional aspects. Teachers meet 2018-19 CEP 39  with parents during Parent Engagement Tuesdays in order to collaborate and formulate action plans for children who may face struggles. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Measures used to include teachers in decisions regarding assessments are: 1. Teachers are represented on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Committee and participate in the decision making process to select school wide assessments. 2. Teacher teams develop and implement assessments that are aligned to the CCLS. 3. Teachers are represented on the Instructional Team and participate in the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures. 4. Teachers determine the instructional needs of their students through the analysis of the student work and benchmark assessments. During grade meetings and professional learning opportunities, they use their knowledge of this analysis to modify goals and inform instruction. 5. Teachers collaborate with school leaders to identify individual professional development goals which will help improve student outcomes. School leaders will provide opportunities for teachers who have been identified as highly effective to share best practices to increase effectiveness in the classroom and build capacity. 6. Teachers utilize a variety of assessments and on-demand writing pieces to determine the teaching points that would best meet the learning needs of their students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal x x x x 2018-19 CEP 40 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) x x  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local x x x x x x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 41  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Public School 177 346 Avenue P Brooklyn, New York 11204 PART I - GENERAL EXPECTIONS P.S. 177 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: • The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of all parents of Title 1 eligible students consistent with Section 1118- Parental Involvement of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). The programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. • In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency (LEP), parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children. This will include providing information and school reports required under Section 111-State Plans of me ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. • The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A program(s) in decision about how the Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. • The school will carry out programs, activities and procedure in accordance with this definition of parental involvement: 2018-19 CEP 43  Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring: • that parents play an integral role in assisting their child's learning • that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child's education at school; • that parents are full partners in their child's education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; • the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in Section 1118- Parent Involvement of the ESSA. PART III - ADOPTION This School Parental Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by signed tear off notices. This policy was adopted by P.S 177 on 09/05/18 and will be in effect for the period of 9/18-6/19. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, Part A children on or before 10/1/2018.. Ann Marie Lettieri Baker Principal Signatures: _________________________ _________________________ _______________________ School Parent(s) Student _________________________ _________________________ _______________________ Date Date Date (Please note that signatures are not required) P.S. 177 will assist the parents of children served by the school, in understanding the standards and meeting the requirements of Title I by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students • Parent orientation meetings • Parent teacher conferences • Dedicated time for parents of 3rd, 4th and 5th graders who scored a level 1 or 2 on the 2015 Common Core Math and/or ELA exams to discuss how the school and family can work together to improve the child’s performance • School-wide parent workshops • Parental representation on the School Leadership Team 2018-19 CEP 44  • Parent workshops on academic assessment (New York State Assessments, Diagnostic and Benchmark Assessments, Reading and Writing Unit Assessments, , Go Math Assessments, TCRWP Running Record Assessments. • Parent signatures on student reading logs and tests • PTA president attends President’s Council and DPW meeting • School Messenger PART II - DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE SCHOOL WILL IMPLEMENT THE REQUIRED SCHOOL PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT POLICY COMPONENTS Parental Involvement and School Quality 1. P.S. 177 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement plan (contained in the RDCEP/DCEP Addendum) under Section 1112- Local Educational Agency Plans of the ESSA: • An annual meeting to engage parents in planning, development and evaluation of Title I programs • Translation of information into any language spoken by a significant percentage of the parents of Title I participating children • Parents will be members of the School Leadership Team and be actively involved in decision making for the school 2. P.S. 177 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under Section 1116- Academic Assessment and Local Educational Agency and School Improvement of the ESSA: • Parents on the School Leadership Team will be involved in the Instructional Performance Review • Parent Coordinator conducts workshops for parents to help them access and interpret Learning Environment Survey, Exemplars, Running Record Assessments, and New York State Assessment reports. • Hiring staff (family workers, school aides, etc.) to do translation into home languages • Conduct parent needs assessment surveys to determine needs of students to meet the standards • Provide for effective parent-school communications by giving sufficient notice of schedules for parent teacher conferences and citywide initiatives. 3. P.S. 177 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parent, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving the quality of its Title I, Part A program. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. • PTA attendance sheets maintained or kept by the PTA president 2018-19 CEP 45  • Number of parents participating in the PTA executive board election monitored by teacher liaison to the PTA • Attendance sheets from ENL Parents Program (language proficiency classes) kept by ENL teacher • Translation of letters, notices to home and documents into parent’s home language • Parent Coordinator outreach program. The home school connection is strengthened by the Parent Coordinator and her ability to contact parents to increase participation in their child’s learning. 4. P. S. 177 will build the parents' capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership among the school involved, parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: - The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the action described in this paragraph • the State's academic content standards; • the State's student academic achievement standards; • the State's and local academic assessments including alternate assessments; • the requirements of Title I, Part A • how to monitor their child's progress and • how to work with educators. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement - The School will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children's academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by: • Parent workshops on Go Math and Teachers College Reading Workshop • Parent workshops on Literacy by Early Childhood specialists and Service Providers • Parent workshops conducted by teachers, family assistants and social worker on strategies and techniques for working with and understand the Common Core Learning Standards • Provide subscription access to literacy resources (i.e. MyON) • The school will, with the assistance of the district and parents, educate it teachers, pupil services personnel, principals and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and the schools by: • Collaborate with Borough Field Support Center to provide professional development training to Title 1 teachers, pupil services personnel, principal, and other staff in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners, implement and coordinate parent programs, and build ties between parents and the school. 2018-19 CEP 46  • Faculty meetings on how to discuss and explain student progress with parents with regard to the Common Core Learning Standards • Training for parents for parent volunteer programs • Parent workshops in performance standards (to familiarize parents with strategies used to provide students with skills necessary to achieve higher levels of performance) • Workshops given by Parent Coordinator and Social Worker on parental involvement • Providing information about services generally provided to students by the DOE (e.g., Supplemental Education Services, special education, ELL) and the school itself • Working with school staff and Regional/District and Central Parent Support Staff if needed, to address and resolve specific parent concerns • The school will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Head Start, Reading First, Early Reading First, Even Start, Home Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as teachers Program and public preschool and other programs, and conduct and/or encourage participation in activities, such as Parent Resource Centers, that support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: • Parent coordinator will plan and carry out transition activities between Pre-K and Kindergarten • Invite parents to the school to take part in transition activities • Parent volunteers assist small group instruction in literacy • Purchasing of supplies and materials for Parent Resource Center (Available throughout the day to provide families with the opportunity to actively participate with their child in literacy activities) • Provide for the health and well-being of their children, including but not limited to discipline, nutrition and hygiene. • The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of Title I participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and to the extent practical, in a language to parent can understand: • Parent Coordinator uses software program to translate all information pertaining to school activities and academic assessments into the parent’s home language • Purchasing of materials and supplies for school newsletter • Providing translators at parents meetings and workshops • Translators provided for parent -teacher conferences • Posting signs, bulletin boards and other displays at school entrance and/or lobby to inform parents how they can receive assistance and information School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 47  Public School 177 346 Avenue P Brooklyn, New York 11204 School Mission: The mission of P.S. 177 is to instill a lifelong love of learning and to foster self-esteem in every child. In addition, we strive to work with parents to develop the social, emotional and educational needs of all children so that they will be able to meet the challenges of their future college and career aspirations. We feel that literacy is the fundamental skill in a well-rounded education, and is essential in order for children to become contributing citizens of our communities, country and world. School Responsibilities Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: P.S. 177 will provide parents with 3 student report cards in November, March and June. Additionally, parents will receive ongoing assessment information related to end-of-unit assessment achievement in literacy, and mathematics. P.S. 177 will: 1. Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 2. Involve parents in the joint development of any School wide Program plan (for SWP schools). 3. Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs, and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs (participating students), and will encourage them to attend. 4. Provide, to the extent feasible, full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports in a format and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parent can understand. 5. Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. 6. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practically possible. 2018-19 CEP 48  7. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in at least math, language arts and reading. 8. Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I. P.S. 177 will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: in September, November, February and March. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Staff will be available for consultation throughout the year every Tuesday afternoon during the UFT Parent Engagement time, by appointment and at class meetings and workshops. Parents may also make arrangements for phone conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities, as follows: P.S. 177 has a high level of parental involvement. Our staff welcomes parent volunteers to assist with special activities, fairs, shows, and classroom activities. Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: [Describe the ways in which parents will support their children’s learning, such as: 1. Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent 2. ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age 3. check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary 4. read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day 5. set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games 2018-19 CEP 49  6. promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time 7. encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child 8. volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits 9. participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education 10. communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district 11. respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested 12. become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact 13. participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible 14. share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child 15. serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Support Team or other school advisory or policy groups Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time. ● Do my homework every day and ask for help when I need to. ● Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time. ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions. ● Try to resolve disagreements peacefully ● Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day. 2018-19 CEP 50 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Early childhood learners who are also entering or emerging based on their English Entering and Emerging English Language Learners: Grades K,1, and 2 Wednesday and Thursday afternoons beginning&nbsp;Wednesday October 24 and Begin description here: · language proficiency require a great deal of additional support with literacy learning;support that regular classroom instruction cannot&nbsp;address. Our Title III immigrant program will provide our youngest immigrant ENLs&nbsp;with concepts of print instruction. · · ending Thursday January 27, 2019 (26 sessions) from 2:30-4:00 p.m. · · with: 1 Kindergarten group of 25 students. 1 grade 1 group of 25 students. 1 grade 2 group of 25 students. Preference will be given to TESOL licensed educators. · The language of instruction will be English. Three common branch or TESOL&nbsp;licensed&nbsp;teachers will be selected to work The materials that will be used include: Targeted Phonics (Teacher Created Materials). rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: · All teachers inclusive of the ENL department staff, receive in-house professional development from Teacher's College, Columbia University. The school's staff developer provides our staff with strategies they may use that will provide access to literacy content to our ENL population. Additionally, the Instructional leads for&nbsp;our ENL Department receive monthly training from the Borough Field Support Center. · · · · Center. All teachers receive training. Training takes place throughout the school year. Topics to be covered: reading, writing, listening, speaking and compliance. Providers: Teacher's College, Columbia University and the Borough Field Support 2018-19 CEP 52  &nbsp;Parents play a very important role in the education of their child.&nbsp; One of rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: · the greatest ways for parents to partner in their child's English education is to learn English, themselves.&nbsp; When parents are able to communicate in English at home, more opportunities will arise for children to practice speaking and listening.&nbsp; Parents and children practicing their new skills together can be a great motivator for both the child, as well as, the adult.&nbsp; · 177 will offer English Language Classes every Wednesday afternoon beginning Wednesday October 24th, 2018 and ending Wednesday January 30, 2019 from 2:30-4:00 p.m. · Community, Health and Fitness, Life Long Learning. · · bilingual Arabic, Chinese, Russian, Spanish, Urdu and Uzbek speaking staff. Parents will have an opportunity to make a smooth transition into a new culture and language. We will make every effort to support the needs of our ELL parents. Providers will be the TESOL&nbsp;licensed members of the PS 177 staff. Parents will be notified by written communication and phone calls by our school's In order to support the needs of our ELL parents with integration into a new setting, PS Topics to be covered include but are not limited to: Welcome, Food, Housing, Work, Our Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, 3. N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 53  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Marlboro School Borough Brooklyn School Number 177 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ann Marie Lettieri- Baker Coach Jennifer Winkler ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher J. Resciniti& Z.Pirmukhamedova Teacher/Subject Area Iwona Rusin/K Teacher/Subject Area Dana Cumella/ Gr. 5 Related-Service Provider Goldie Grunfeld/Speech Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Mr. Cosentino. Ms.Gusenfitter Coach Jessica Romano School Counselor Heather Shelton Parent Aileen Echeandia Parent Coordinator Susana Caleca Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 55  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 916 Total number of ELLs 322 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 35.15% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 177 the TCRWP is in use throughout all grades. The analysis of data, including the NYSESLAT, reveals the linguistic strengths and deficiencies of each ELL. It is due to these results, that we modify our lessons and teaching strategies accordingly. The TCRWP assessment is done three times a year along with informal ongoing assessments such as informal reading assessments, teacher observations, running records, conference notes, and pre and post unit assessments. The pre assessment is to access their prior knowledge and prerequisite skills of a particular unit. The post assessment is used to assess what skills they learned and what standards that have nor have not met during the unit. All students, including ELLs , are assessed using the same tools. From this data, teachers are able to drive instructional focus, determine which reading strategies each child needs to work on, determine their independent and guided reading levels, and plan literacy lessons. Also, teachers are able to effectively differentiate instruction for each student. We use the NYSESLAT to drive instruction for our 2018-19 CEP 56  entering and emerging ELLs as well as the TCRWP concept of print, alphabet and word recognition, and interviews so see how much knowledge of the English language our ELLs possess. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In December we introduced the parallel teaching model during the mini lesson in order to support this effort. All ELLs are heterogeneously grouped throughout the grade but are coached in our small group (usually 10-15 students) for the mini lesson. The mini lesson is ten minutes in length. Our ELLs are grouped in a triad for turn and talk with assistance from the ENL teacher. After the mini lesson students work independently or with a partner to complete a reading or writing task. While the students work a smaller group (of 3-5) are pulled to learn a reading or writing strategy or for guided reading. Individual conferencing takes place at this time to coach the children on strategies they are struggling with or just to check in. This lesson takes place for 45 minutes a day, 180 minutes a week to comply with the Part 154 mandate for ELA for transitioning and expanding ELLs and as part of the integrated mandate for the entering and emerging ELLs. In Stand Alone we brought back On Our Way To English Language Development Program. It is a thematic, content based program for oral language, reading and writing instruction.. The entering and emerging ELLs are pulled into a separate room for Stand Alone by grade 45 minutes per day, 180 minutes a week to comply with the Stand Alone Part 154 mandate. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL program will be evaluated every year by looking at student progress over time, articulating with classroom teachers, and through formal and informal observations. Our formal evaluations are the TCRWP running record assessments, NYS ELA, NYS Math, NYS Science, and NYSESLAT. Our informal assessments include pre and post group assessments, and small group and individual conference notes to assess strategies and skills learned and needed. Measurements of progress include small group instruction followed by one on one conferencing in Reading and Writing. This will help the ELLs to achieve targeted grade specific reading levels. In writing, a pre and post on demand piece is produced independently. This measures the progress each student makes prior to the unit of study and upon completion of the unit. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have structures in place to address interventions once the summative data is gathered. In addition to our parallel teaching model during the mini lesson, we break up into smaller groups as we teach strategies followed by individual conferences. We have small group Stand Alone for entering and emerging using On Our Way To English Literacy Program. In addition to this we also provide visuals and demonstrations for support during Reading and Writing. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 177 uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. Classroom teachers use various assessments to collect data on student performance in literacy and math. Teachers utilize the TCRWP, teacher created assessments, observations, and reading and writing conferences to assess students' literacy skills and progress. Based on the results of these assessments, students are provided with various literacy academic intervention services, such as individual and small group work with the teacher within the classroom. Teachers also use various classroom math assessments in order to evaluate children's math skills. We use the math assessments provided in Go Math program which also has built in Spanish vocabulary. Go Math also allows teachers to use an ELL approach which is built into the program. We use teacher created math skills assessments, and math problem solving exemplars. Students use rubrics and checklists in Reading and Math to either peer or self assess. Students also work 1 on 1 with the teacher or in small groups with classmates with similar needs during the school day. Children who were in the newcomer and beginner ENL support focused on beginning literacy and language skills. Additionally, newcomer and beginner English Langugae Learners, as well as all ELLs who are literate in their first language, are offered native language support to assist them in math and science. We provide children with bilingual dictionaries in order to provide them with terminology in their native language in the content areas. We are providing AIS for children who fall below grade level as a result of the ELA and/or the NYSESLAT. Lastly, children who score commanding on the NYSESLAT are now former ELL's and are provided with ENL service 90 minutes a week as they transition to language proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 57  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have created a Title III and Title IIIa program by referring to the EDAT and RLAT. We have utilized our Title III program to meet the Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives. The Title III Program at PS 177 for the school year 2018-2019 focuses on our Entering and Emerging ELL students in grades K, 1 and 2. This program meets on Wednesday's and Thursday's from 2:30 - 4:00. School data from the EDAT indicated that ELA is the area that needs the most improvement. The focus of the program is phonemic awareness and concepts of print instruction. The program will provide the explicit instruction and literacy support that regular classroom instruction can not address. The materials will include Targeted Phonics (Teacher Made Materials). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At our weekly meetings the ENL team reviews data provided by the classroom teachers as a result of the Title lll and Title llla programs. The data is analyzed to see if the programs were effective. In addition we will will analyze the data from the 2018 ELA and NYSESLAT results to see if we need to implement any changes for the upcoming school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. The program model at PS 177 is a Freestanding ENL model. We offer a parallel teaching model as part of our integrated program. An ENL teacher offers support with students in their work while maintaining expected Reading or Writing behaviors. There is an emphasis on literacy employing ENL strategies, paired with content area support. During the mini-lesson teachers model a specific strategy and then students are given an opportunity to apply that strategy individually and/or in small groups, with varying degrees of ENL teacher support depending on student ability. Scaffolding techniques are actively used. Students are engaged in lessons and participate fully. All four modalities of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are incorporated into ENL lessons. Our ENL teachers work to make content comprehensible to enrich the language development of our ELLs. We use a workshop model of instruction in which teachers conduct a mini-lesson with a clearly stated teaching point. Our Stand Alone Program is designed so that the teacher for the grade of integrated ELL program will also teach the grade for the Stand Alone Program. The Entering and Emerging ELLs are pulled out during another period other than Reading, Writing and Math, and will receive Stand Alone using On Our Way To English Literacy Program and TC Units of Study in Phonics (k-1) or Pearson Phonics (3-5). b. TBE program. If applicable. PS177 does not have a transitional bilingual education program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. PS177 does not have a dual language program at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2a. Instruction is delivered in a freestanding ENL program using the parallel teaching model. We provide a comprehensive language program for students in kindergarten through grade five in accordance with CR Part 154.2 guidelines. Each ENL 2018-19 CEP 58  teacher is allocating correct time periods to students based upon their English language proficiency levels as well as any IEP mandates for special education students in the ENL program. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of language proficiency receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, 180 minutes of Stand Alone and 180 minutes of integrated ENL services. Students at the Transitional and Expanding levels of language proficiency receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Although Commanding students are mandated to receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week, they are placed heterogeneously with the other ENL children and get additional non-mandated support. Each of the 6 ENL teachers service an individual grade k-5. Explicit ENL and ELA instructional minutes are delivered as per CR Part 154.2 because we carefully schedule each grade levels ENL periods taking into consideration the time of day classroom teachers are delivering ELA instruction. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of language proficiency receive their ENL instruction, 1 unit of study as stand-alone and 1 unit of study integrated ENL/ELA. Students at the Transitional and Expanding levels of language proficiency receive their ENL instruction in 1 unit of study integrated ENL/ELA, so they still receive 180 minutes of ELA instruction with their classroom teachers. Commanding levels of language proficiency receive their integrated ENL instruction for .5 unit, so they still receive 90 minutes of ELA instruction with the ENL teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Classroom and content area teachers are aware of the needs of their ELLs. Teachers integrate a variety of ENL strategies into their teaching. Scaffolding, modeling, and extended time are examples of strategies employed in content area teaching. ENL teachers integrate science, social studies into their reading and writing curriculum, aligned with Common Core Learning Standards, in order to provide ELLs with needed materials to succeed in the classroom. There are many resources within the reading and writing programs that have ENL components built in. Teachers use differentiated instruction in all content areas to meet the needs of the ELLs. In order to prepare our students for success in the classroom, the development of academic language is crucial. Students are constantly immersed in and exposed to literature. Students learn English through books and other texts featuring academic language. Reading books, discussing texts, in addition to using and hearing various vocabulary words introduces ELL's to academic language The materials used in our programs vary. We have an ENL classroom library, multicultural books, various big books, picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, magazines and non-fiction texts. Many visuals are used to support language learning. The use of manipulatives, song and rhythm, hands on activities, and the incorporation of the idea of multiple intelligences all enrich the learning of our students. We at PS 177 recognize the importance of using a combination of both comprehensible input, and specific vocabulary they will encounter in their classrooms and content areas. It is crucial to support ELL's in their content area studies. The focus of instruction is structured around the concentration of the mainstream classroom, facilitating and scaffolding language and academic learning. In addition to this, a variety of teaching approaches are utilized. Comprehension is aided by the use of visual aids, gestures, commands for physical action, sentence expansions, and open-ended sentences. ENL and classroom teachers articulate weekly and plan their lessons together in order to effectively achieve student learning. In the ENL program, subject areas and themes are suggested by the work being done in the students’ mainstream class. The ENL program is aligned with the classroom curriculum therefore maximizing student learning and language development. The collaboration between the classroom and ENL teachers helps to facilitate language acquisition for ELLs. This communication also opens the doors for teacher/teacher support. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At PS177 all identified ELLs are given an opportunity to be evaluated in their home language. If an eligible student's home language is Spanish he/she is given a Spanish LAB. The school's testing coordinator makes sure that appropriate accommodations are in place for ELLs. ELL students may use English and alternate language editions simultaneously on the state wide tests. Our testing coordinator orders tests for eligible ELLs in their home languages if available. If these tests are not 2018-19 CEP 59  pre-printed in their language, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are provided for the students. Students are taught on the daily basis how to use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries (direct translation of words only) in the classroom. Students use them for homework assignments as well. In addition, we at PS177, identify our bilingual staff who can provide oral translation to ELLs when necessary. ELLs who make use of alternative editions or oral translation may write responses to open-ended questions in their home language, as per directions of the given test (ex. Science test). The bilingual staff member will translate the home language responses for the science teacher who scores the test. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5A. Our school has enrolled students from other countries who enter the public school in the US after grade 2; have had at least two years less schooling than their peers; or function at least two years below expected grade level in reading and mathematics and come from a home in which a language other than English is spoken. These students are classified as Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). When a student enters the school, their English ability is assessed using the LAB-R. Following this, they are provided with the ENL services that they need.They are then administered the SIFE interview as well as the SIFE exam. We also implement a program designed to maximize learning by taking into consideration the student’s level of academic performance. After assessing the student’s current skill levels, instruction is tailored to fill in the language regression gap that was caused by interrupted schooling. The SIFE student gets AIS services in addition to ENL services.The ENL teachers work with SIFE students to systematically build foundational language skills. We have targeted intervention programs for ENLs in ELA and math. 5b. Newcomers - Throughout the entire school year new students are being admitted into PS 177. Newcomers are students with very special needs. Each new admit is administered the NYSITELL, in order to assess their English ability. If they are eligible for ENL services and are in grades 1-5, they are grouped in a classroom with ELL’s and non ELL’s. If they are in kindergarten they are placed in a class with other entering an emerging ELL's. This allows the teacher to focus on the intense vocabulary development including social language that these students require. All newcomers receive additional attention and support during and outside of scheduled periods of instruction as required under CR part 154.2. We have many materials that are geared towards newcomers, and encourage language development. We implement a program of study that addresses their specific needs. We work to establish a language foundation through vocabulary-building activities that incorporate listening and speaking. We model correct English language usage and expose students to appropriately leveled literacy materials. We emphasize the development of beginner phonics skills that will lead to further developments in reading and writing. 5c. A Title III after school test preparation program will help support ELL students' performance and language development. This program is especially geared towards new state requirement that says that ENLs in grades three through five must take the ELA after one year and are never exempt from math and science exams. Therefore we have implemented an instructional program to prepare them for the demands of these tests. Students engage in listening activities and are taught how to take notes that aid in constructing written responses to questions about the stories that are read aloud to them. Students are also taught comprehension strategies to support their ability to correctly answer multiple choice and constructed response questions after reading grade level passages. All students are working towards college and career readiness via academic tasks based on Common Core State Standards. For ENLs receiving service for four to six years we analyze the available NYSESLAT data to identify which modalities need to be stressed during instruction. In all cases we have found that students perform better on the listening and speaking subtests than they do on the reading and writing subtests. As a result, we provide instruction to remediate this deficiency. Students are engaged in lessons that are designed to teach reading and writing strategies during their ENL periods, and general classroom literacy periods. 2018-19 CEP 60  5d. Some English Language Learners stay within the program for many years. The BESIS extension of services is provided to long-term ELLs. This permits ELLs to remain within the program. In addition to this, the extension of services allows them to further qualify for testing modifications and accommodations beyond 3 years, for up to 6 years. Since we are an elementary school, we do not have any long-term ENLs. 5e. In addition to our current ELLs, we also provide these targeted intervention services for ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT to continue giving transitional support for at least two years after testing out. The former ELLs are given testing accommodations for up to two years after testing out on the NYSESLAT. These testing accommodations include separate location, extended time, use of bilingual glossaries, and simultaneous use of English and alternative language test editions. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL program is aligned with the new rigorous requirements that include teachers support, as well as classroom resources that reflect the city and state standards. We are implementing Common Core throughout all grade levels. It is especially effective for our ELL-SWDs because it provides consistency which is so important for these students. Teachers use data and accountability tools like ATS and SESIS to improve teaching and learning in standard-driven instructional programs. Computer programs such as MyOn are available for children to do independent work and self assess their skills. Some instructional strategies found to be most effective when educating ELL-SWDs include graphic organizers, visual representations, modeling, role-playing, and total physical response. We also implement the application and teaching strategies to support teaching through a variety of staff development in order to accelerate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At PS 177 we are lucky to have ICT classes on grade levels K-5. ICT classes are combined of both: general education and special education students. ELLs could be on both sides of the roster in ICT classes. An ENL teacher use the parallel teaching method for Reading and Writing to work with the ELL population of ICT classes. This way our ELL-SWDs don’t miss out any subject areas covered during the school day. It has proven to be very effective based on last year's test scores. ICT is programmed for the least restrictive environment, within students comfort zone, in a small group setting. The use of technology, charts and visuals are being utilized successfully. There are mandated students in ENL program that are identified as SWD. Some of these students are in Special Education bridge class K-1, 1-2 , 3 and 4-5. The rest of our ENL-SWDs are SETTS students in the general education classroom. The needs of these students are taken into consideration and they are accommodated appropriately as per IEP. Such accommodations may include smaller group size, the presence of a paraprofessional during ENL periods, and specialized modifications. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on this years TCWRP results for grades K-5 and state wide ELA and Mathematics exams for upper grades, supplementary support services are provided for transitioning, expanding and commanding students. ELLs in need are included for all support services. AIS is a built in program and will continue for the for the 2018-2019 school year. After school, ENL students are invited to participate in ELA and Math Test Preparation for the state wide exams. Our ENL students attend one of our two ENL programs, the Title III or Title IIIA after school programs. This year our entering and emerging students were invited to attend our Title IIIA immigrant program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The current program we are using at P.S. 177 for our integrated ENL program is Teacher's College Reading & Writing Workshop. We are utilizing the On Our Way to English Literacy Program in the 2018-2019 school year for our Stand Alone Program because we realized that the thematic program will benefit our stand alone ENL classes. During Stand Alone periods we are also using TC Units of Study in Phonics and Pearson Phonics to give our students stronger phonemic awareness which will aid in mastery of literacy skills. 2018-19 CEP 61  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not currently have a Bilingual Program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Parents are notified about all programs, and all letters sent home are translated into their native languages. All students can take part in our school programs regardless of ELL status. Students participate in band, chorus, physical education, and technology activities which take place during and after school. We also invite our ELL's to participate in the Title III and Title llla after-school and Saturday program, which provides supplemental language, literacy and math instruction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of instructional programs and materials to support our ELLs including, “Reading Units of Study", "Writing Units in Study of Opinion, Information and Narrative Writing", “Wilson Fundations” kit,. and “Finish Line” workbooks for after school. Each classroom has leveled libraries with fiction and non-fiction trade books, shared reading charts and posters, Smartboards, Chinese, Russian and Spanish versions of familiar picture books. Our “Go Math” program has a built in ESL component as well as vocabulary card in English and Spanish. We use MyOn which is a state of the art learning platform based on a Lexile Reading Program. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program, home language support is delivered through use of bilingual libraries. We have purchased familiar trade books in Russian, Spanish, and Chinese so students can refer to the translated version while reading the English version. Students are also encouraged to speak and write in their home language while developing English language skills. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our resources correspond to the ages, grade levels, and English proficiency levels of our ELLs. We are careful to appropriately match materials to each of our student groups. We do this by ordering materials at a variety of difficulty levels so that all needs can be met. We have materials for students at the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding levels of English language proficiency at all age and grade levels. We accomplish this by analyzing sources of formal and informal data. We provide instruction that meets students at their current level of functioning and helps build upon the skills they already possess. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? At this time our school does not have co-location. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We were able to start administering the NYSITELL to our pre k enrolled students in the beginning of June of 2017 (and June 2018) before the beginning of the school year. Therefore based on the NYSITELL and official, Spring NYSESLAT scores, we were able to set up potential small groups in classes when reorganization starts in June. With respect to these newly enrolled ELLs who know virtually little or no English, native language support is given in a variety of ways. Our school policy is to assign a “buddy” who speaks his or her native language in class; hence, peer tutoring becomes an active and helpful involvement in learning. Having this practice in-place, a type of “comfort zone” is established to lessen anxiety as the process of assimilation unfolds. In addition, during our regular school day we have student-teachers from area colleges who assist us with our ELL sub-group population. When possible the child is placed in a class where the teacher or paraprofessional speaks the child’s native language. Our parent coordiantor, Sue Coleca and the principal Ms. Lettier-Baker host new parent meet and greet, and parents are invited to visit the classrooms. This year our Principal, Assistant Principals, Mr. Cosentino and Ms. Gusenfitter and the 2018-19 CEP 62  parent coordinator of our school invite newly enrolled ELLs to celebrate their cultures by having a multicultural feast. New ELLs are invited by Ms. Provador to join our music program, school dance club and talent show. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 177 is an elementary school, we do not know offer any language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? PS177 does not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The professional development plan for all ENL personnel at the school includes professional development workshops offered through the Office of ENLs. Professional development opportunities are typically initiative-related and offer rigorous, ongoing learning e.g., covering topics such as co-teaching, literacy, English language arts, native language arts, math, science, social studies, curriculum enhancements, academic language, ENL data, and languages other than English. ENL Compliance and Performance Specialists (CPSs) provide specialized technical assistance on ELL-related matters (e.g., quality reviews, LAP, CR Part 154, Title III) through group workshops, school-based visits, and administrative support. CPSs also provide technical assistance by collecting and using demographic and performance data to inform service improvement efforts; supporting development and implementation of grants and initiatives within schools; and ensuring appropriate and compliant delivery of instructional and programmatic services for all ENLs. Teachers of ELLs are offered an opportunity to attend workshops organized by Teacher's College on a monthly basis. These workshops focused on the Reader's Workshop and Writing Workshop in an ENL classroom. In addition throughout the year, classroom teachers and ENL teachers with administrators meet every Monday for in-house professional development to discuss the implementation of the Common Core, the Danielson rubric, and Universal Design for Learning. During these sessions, how to make the Common Core Standards accessible to English Language Learners is always discussed, particularly in the context of Response to Intervention and the Universal Design for Learning. The ELL Coordinator and teachers attends monthly ENL district meetings. When the ELL teachers return from professional development meetings they turn key the for the rest of the team or full staff (depending on need) . The ELL Coordinator will turn key the professional development for non pedagogic staff the last Monday of the month from 2:30 to 3:30. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR Part 154.2, we have worked to ensure that all of our teaching staff has the required 15% of hours of ELL training for all staff and 50% for ENL teachers. Also our speech therapists, guidance counselor, secretaries and parent coordinator will be included in the workshops. Our Assistant Principals attend and oversee the training. The training will give teachers strategies and tools to use in the classroom to work with the ELL students. The ENL teachers will participate in DOE training to refine and improve their teaching skills. Our ELL Coordinator attends the the ELL workshops that are focused on skills and strategies that teachers can implement with ELL students and also share best practices. After attending the workshops, the coordinator will turn key to the rest of the staff of PS177 during Professional Development. A secretary is in main office is in charge of all 2018-19 CEP 63  Professional Development hours offered in school and out of the school. Records which indicate compliance include agendas, sign-in sheets, minutes and handouts are kept in the main office in a Professional Development binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? On a weekly basis appointments are made by ENL teachers with individual parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the ENL program. Parents can also initiate these meetings by calling the school to make an appointment. This time is slotted from 2:20-3:35 during Tuesday parent engagement, and time is also allotted on teachers prep periods. There are also four parent meetings a year that can be found on the DOE calendar. Topics discussed include their child's language development progress and needs in all content areas. ENL teachers explain a child's progress in regards to their proficiency level on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. To ensure that the parent understanding, an interpreter is provided. If an interpreter is not available, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized. For the past two years parents of ELL's were invited to an additional testing meeting to learn about the NYSESLAT and its outcomes. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have a very actively involved parent population at P.S. 177, which includes our parents of ELLs. When available, invitations to all meetings and school functions are sent home in languages as requested by parents so they can understand and participate fully. Important events include open school day, P.T.A. meetings, and classroom orientations. Or principal Mrs. Lettieri has first Friday meetings where the parents come for a question and answer session. Then they are invited into the classrooms. Parent meetings of the ELLs are conducted periodically throughout the school year to discuss individual academic and social progress. Curriculum requirements are facilitated by our staff members who speak and write fluently in Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Urdu, Uzbek, Albanian, Arabic, Hebrew, French, on open school day, P.T.A. meetings, classroom orientations, and other school events. Parent meetings of the ELLs are conducted on weekly basis throughout the school year during parent engagement to discuss individual academic and social progress. Every September we have a multicultural potluck dinner where teachers, parents and children get together. During this dinner parents are introduced to the PTA and encouraged to get involved. This really helps to build the PS 177 community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ann marie Lettieri Baker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 177 21 K School DBN: 21K177 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Ann Marie Lettieri- Baker Principal Maria Gusenfitter Assistant Principal Susana Caleca Parent Coordinator Jennifer Resciniti ENL/Bilingual Teacher Aileen Echeandia Parent Dana Cumella Teacher/Subject Area Iwona Rusin Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Winkler Jessica Romano Coach Coach Heather Shelton School Counselor Isabel DiMola Goldie Grunfeld Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Speech Provider Z. Pirmukhamedova Other ENL Teacher N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 6/19/18 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K177 School Name: Marlboro Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sue Caleca Parent Coordinator YES x x x x x x x x x x x x YES x x x * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The HLIS (Home Language Survey) is one way we have assessed our oral and written translation needs. Another way is to go to UPPG screen and the RBOB screen on ATS that gives us the preferred language of communication with parents. We also distributed the Language Preference Survey created by the NYCDOE to every child’s parent (grades Pre-K to 5) to ensure that parents are provided with information in a language they can understand. Surveys were distributed to children and returned to the child’s teacher. Surveys were then collected and the data was compiled. In addition to the surveys, teachers also lend information that they’ve learned about the language in which parents prefer to communicate through parent interviews, meetings, conversations, etc. 2018-19 CEP 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali 4 15 4 0.39 1.47 0.39 Chinese Any 138 13.54 5 15 4 127 11 0 1 3 3 1 4 0.49 1.47 0.39 12.46 1.08 0 0.1 0.29 0.29 0.1 0.39 39.74 0.1 0.1 0.1 17.37 19.43 0.2 0.1 2.16 0.79 Cantonese Croatian French Georgian Italian Korean Mandarin English Oneida Polish Romanian Russian Spanish Turkish Tadzhik (AKA Tajik) Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek 0 1 1 3 3 0 0 0 0.1 0.1 0.29 0.29 0 0 411 40.33 405 0 1 1 176 197 2 2 21 9 30 0 0.1 0.1 17.27 19.33 0.2 0.2 2.06 0.88 2.94 1 1 1 177 198 2 1 22 8 29 2018-19 CEP 68  2.85 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are no languages that represent at least 10% other than the covered languages listed above. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. • NYS Testing Information *2018-2019 school calendar • Flyers • PTA Monthly event calendars • Report Cards • Grade Newsletters • Notices • Academic After-school Program Invitations *as needed *Sept-June *November, March, June *Sept-June *Sept-June *September For any State documents that we need translated we use the DOE info hub template for covered languages such as testing information, testing calendars and report card. We use bilingual staff, DOE, T&I Unit for translation and DOE contracted vendors to translate into covered languages, translation vendor, bilingual staff and interpreters over (18 years of age) to translate into non covered languages. 2018-19 CEP 69  • Notices about parent involvement activities • School Surveys • Permission Slips for Field Trips *Sept-June *January and April •Letters about Parent Workshops /meetings *Sept-June *as offered x x x x x x x x x 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? • Phone calls home to parents *daily • Parent orientation and ENL program information *Sept, May and for new admits • Parent teacher conferences • Informational meetings and social gatherings *Sept,Nov, March, May All of our translation will be done in house by our bilingual staff, and volunteers over 18. We will use our NYC DOE over the phone interpreter services and our Language Translation And Interpretation Unit to assist us in any language that cannot be translated 2018-19 CEP 70  • PTA meetings • IEP conferences *as needed *monthly • Parent Engagement x x x *as needed *as needed x x x x x x 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Translated School Messenger messages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. If there is an emergency in school our school has a phone relay via school messenger in all the covered languages. We have interpreters in place for non covered languages. If a parent has an emergency we have translators for the covered languages and we will immediately call the Language Translation and Interpretation unit for any not covered languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 71  PS 177 will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663, by utilizing the parent coordinator as a liaison between the school and the non-English speaking parents to inform them of oral and written translation services available. Notices in home languages will be sent to inform non-English parents of oral and written translation services available. Important documents are translated and sent home with children at the beginning of the year and in a timely fashion throughout the rest of the school year. Announcements in parents' home languages will be made at PTA meetings and workshops, regarding oral and written translation services available. We have a board on display in the parent coordinators office of the school building with the information for Over The Phone Interpreter Services and DOE Vendor Information of Additional Language Resources. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather feedback from parents through conversations parents have with our teaching staff, our parent coordinator, and our administration. We also use the information from the Learning Environment Survey. Our school will create and distribute a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Ongoing communication with ELL families during Parent Engagement Tuesdays will be used to gather input from parents and provide an opportunity for parents to voice suggestions. First Friday with Ms. Lettieri is an informative question and answer session with parents that takes place the first Friday morning of every month to gather feedback on questions or concerns they they have. 2018-19 CEP 72 
