2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K181 School Name: P.S. 181 BROOKLYN Principal: VICTOR ESANNASON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The John L. Steptoe School 331700010181 PK, K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 1023 New York Avenue 718-462-5298 School Number (DBN): 17K181 718- 284-5053 Phone Number: Cheryl Fauntelroy Fax: Cfauntl@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Victor Esannason Michael George Veronica Clarke Michael George Antony Cyrus n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 17 Clarence G. Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place, Brooklyn NY 11213 Superintendent’s Office Address: Cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: 718-953-4425 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDeGovia Executive Director: 415 89th St., Brooklyn NY 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-284-5053 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Victor Esannason Michael George Marsha Charles Barbara Richardson Veronica Clarke n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable MelyssandrePierre Crystal English Member/ parent Member/ parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Carol Ventour J. Lisowski n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a L. Mondesir n/a Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ parent Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/teacher Member/ parent Member/parent Member/ teacher Member/ parent Member/ Paraprofessional Member/ teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: SCEP Overview The mission of PS 181, the John L. Steptoe School, is to effectively prepare students for the 21st Century and align their academic experience with real world demands. Through educational experiences, students can become lifelong learners and obtain the skills for college and career readiness. All stakeholders of our school are dedicated to achieving high standards of academic excellence for our students. To obtain this goal, we will promote excellence through high standards of teaching, positive academic behavior, and social/emotional support. To further assist in this endeavor, we will provide our students with a safe, supportive, and highly structured learning environment. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 181 is a Pre K - 8 school located in East Flatbush. Our school community consists of students and staff from various cultures and backgrounds. Our school community consists of the following student subgroups: English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and General Education Students. In order to support our diverse school community, we have implemented the following: Special Initiatives Sanford Harmony Program  Generation Ready  Restorative Practices  PBIS   Rubicon Atlas    RTI  UDL  My On Reading  Algebra for All  Reading Rescue Skedula i-Ready Strategic Collaborations/Partnerships  Beacon: Afterschool Program  Medgar Evers College  Generation Ready   Datacation LDC I3 Project 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations  ELL- 13% of our student population comprise of English Language Learners with home languages including   Spanish, French, Hatian Creole and Arabic SWD- 16% of our student population receive special need services. We currently have 3 12:1:1 bridge classes and an ICT class inclusive on each grade. STH- 5% of our students are currently in temporary housing. We as a school community provide these students with the extra support, materials, and resources they may need in an effort to ensure that they may achieve success despite their current circumstances. Student Population Needs  ELL-Language acquisition and development and social-emotional support   SWD- Strategic intervention aligned to IEP goals and social-emotional support STH- Social-emotional and economic support 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress on Framework for Great Schools PS 181 continues to promote students learning through instruction, parent engagement, school community and leadership as follows:  Rigorous Instruction- Staffed Literacy Coach Grades K-2; Consultant services through Generation Ready;Systems and Resources- Atlas Rubicon (Curriculum), Skedula (Grading System), i-Ready and My On Reading- Adaptive Learning Program-Progress towards Shifts in Math and Quality Discussions Supportive learning Environment- School initiatives such as PBIS, Restorative Practices, and Sanford Harmony for social and emotional support- Progress towards Safety   Collaborative Teachers- Weekly Grade Team Teacher Meeting- Datawise Protocol;Ongoing Professional Development and supports ; Weekly Professional Learning Communities-Progress towards Innovation and Teacher Responsibility  Effective School Leadership-Implementation os systems to support and manage teacher practice and student achievement ,(Generation Ready, Atlas Rubicon, Skedula, PBIS, Restorative Practices, and Sanford Harrmony)- Progress towards teacher influence Strong Family Ties-Community- Collaboration with Beacon, Medgar Evers College, Sanford Harmony, and D75 PS 396- Progress towards Parent Involvement in Schools   Trust- Social Emotional initiatives -PBIS, Restorative Practiice, Sanford Harmony, and Skedula- Progress towards Student-Teacher Trust 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K181 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 689 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 47 48 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 29 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 72.6% % Reduced Lunch 13.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.9% 10.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.2 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 55% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 96 95 11 91.8% 0.4% 19.7% 84.0% 1.0% 2.3% 4 3% 9.5 21.5% 20% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. SOP(s) Addressed n/a X n/a n/a 3.3 3.4 3.5 The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 School Quality Review and 2018 School Quality Guide the school has the following strengths and needs: School Strengths  Teachers are beginning to develop a vision and use data to make curricular decisions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15   Teachers are in the process of developing multiple types of assessments to ensure alignment between curriculum and assessment  Teachers are learning to provide feedback based on data to students to address student ownership of learning School Needs  Teachers need to continue their professional growth in the use pre, post, formative and summative assessment data across all grades and subject areas, specifically, science and social studies.  Teachers refine and sustain a comprehensive system for using data  Teachers must continue to provide ongoing feedback which is aligned to conversations and student next steps based on data and assessment rubric Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will align lesson plans to data driven curriculum maps resulting in a 10 percent student performance growth on formative and summative assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Organize the schedule to ensure there are weekly grade team meetings; Weekly Professional Learning Communities meetings for 80 minutes where teachers are using assessments to inform instruction Teachers Paras Sept -June Principal Weekly Mondays Sept 2018- June2019 Assistant Principals Literacy Coach Utilize RTI, UDL strategies, and the school instructional focus implemented through lesson plans. Support students through Response to Intervention supporting Tier 1 and Tier 2 leveled intervention Teachers Quarterly Principal SWD ELLS October 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Teachers Lowest 1/3 Paras Monthly communication newsletters to parents. Weekly parent real time information using Skedula and Tuesday Parent Engagement Day. Parental workshops facilitated through the collaboration of the PTA, Parent Coordinator, and Teaching Staff. Parents Monthly Teachers All Students October 2018-June 2019 Related Service Providers Grade Team Leaders Grade team Parent Coordinator Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Teachers continue to monitor and record student progress toward standards using i-Ready diagnostics, Dibels,, MOSL assessments, and uniformed grade level subject area assessments and performance tasks, Teachers will utilize this data to plan and drive instruction. Teachers Quarterly RTI Team All Students October 2018-June 2019 Teachers Paras Grade Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with real time data regarding school events and student progress. Teachers will provide student progress data via Pupil Path (online grading system), quarterly progress reports, and quarterly report cards. Through the use of the PS 181 School App, school staff (teachers, parent coordinator, and administration) will be able to provide up to date information regarding upcoming school events and initiative. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources / Instructional Resources / Schedule Adjustments These allocations will provide per session funding for Teachers and Para's through continued professional development, after school curriculum mapping and assessment creation and scoring. Generation Ready, consultants, will assist teachers with the development of on going assessments aligned to the CCLS. In addition, resources and instructional support materials such as Dibels and i-Ready diagnostics, provide real-time data for continued progress monitoring of benchmark assessments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams will align lesson plans to data driven curriculum maps resulting in a 5 percent student performance growth on formative and summative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observations as identified in Advance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed n/a x n/a x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017 School Quality Review and 2018 School Quality Guide the schools strengths and needs are: School Strengths  The school-wide PBIS program supports the mantra of (PRO) pride, respect, and organize  Students share ideas for improving the quality of school-wide activities with their student council representatives Structures such as the SIT and PPT are in place to determine and assess the quality of academic, social, and emotional progress throughout the year  2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  School Needs  The school community needs to plan and implement research based programs and practices for referral and support of all students that address social and emotional developmental health and academic success  The school community needs to utilize data to identify areas of need and utilize resources to promote student social and emotional developmental health Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. : By June 2019, teachers instructional practice will meet the diverse needs of the school community and will make students feel physically and intellectually safe as evidenced by an increase in the percentage of students who feel safe on the 2019 School Learning Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development to support staff in the implementation of student supports, classroom management, mindsets and academic and personal behaviors. In addition, continue professional development in PBIS, Sanford Harmony and other programs such as Restorative Practices. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal Asstistant Principals Teachers Staff Once per month Mondays Principal Assistant Principals PD Providers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Guidance SIT Team and PBIS Team will provide support services to staff and students with disabilities and overage students surrounding IEP goals and focusing on creating inclusive school environments Teachers Bi-weekly PBIS Team SWD Friday's SIT Team Overage Agency Supported Students Oct 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals Psychologist Social Worker Guidance IEP/SETSS Teacher Teachers Parent Coordinator Monthly student assemblies focusing on the recognition of student accomplishments and improvements. Students Monthly Principal Parents Nov 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal Grade team leaders Teachers Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  School based parental workshops which provide training and information needed to become actively involved and aware of children's social and emotional development. PTA Monthly PTA Parent Coordinator Parents Monday Parent Coordinator Oct 2018- June 2019 Administrative Team Teachers Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Workshops and Parent Involvement Initiatives such workshops aligned to CCLS, College Access, Language Acquisition Support, and Social Emotional support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources / Instructional Resources / Schedule Adjustments These allocations will support the continued professional development for the implementation and sustainability of the PBIS school wide initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, , teachers instructional practice will meet the diverse needs of the school community and will make students feel physically and intellectually safe as evidenced by an increase in the percentage of students who feel safe on the PS 181 School Learning Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Surveys, OORS Data, Quarterly Assessments, and Report Card Data and percentage of student passing Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a n/a x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 School Quality Review and 2018 School Quality Guide the school's strengths and needs are: School Strengths  Teachers continue to engage in conversations about aligning daily plans to unit plans and curriculum  Teachers continue to establish short and long term goals for groups of students School Needs School leader needs to ensure that teachers use plans informed by data and grade level goals for students   Teachers must provide opportunities for full student engagement through higher levels of thinking  Teachers need to ensure the utilization of instructional practices and strategies that are adaptive and aligned to plans for groups of students with a variety of needs and learning styles 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will use data and assessments to inform and adjust instruction utilizing strategies and feedback to ensure students are learning at high levels resulting in a 10 percent student performance growth on formative and summative assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Scheduled time during the school day for grade team meetings. Utilize weekly PLC's allowing staff professional development opportunities to create and modify lesson plans and units aligned with CCLS and increase the level of rigor. Teachers Weekly Principal Paraprofessionals Sept 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals Grade team Leaders UDL Strategies, checks for understanding, and scaffolds to support English Language Learners and Students with disabilities. Teachers Monthly Principal Teachers ELL SWD Monday's Assistant Principals Sept 2018- June 2019 Grade Team Leaders Teachers Conduct collegial walk-throughs and provide staff with effective feedback, resources and tools.. Teachers Monthly Principal Provide parental workshops and resources to support parents in working with their children to improve student achievement in literacy and mathematics. Oct 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principal Grade Team Leaders Parent Monthly Principal Teachers Students Oct 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals Grade Team Leaders PTA Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Providing monthly Parent Workshops; School communication via Pupil Path, PS School App, and backpack notices; Tuesday Parent Engagement Open Houses Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources / Instructional Resources / Schedule Adjustments Funding allocations will be utilized to provide teacher professional development utilizing smartboards in the classroom and curriculum mapping on Rubicon Atlas. Furthermore, resources such as IReady, My On Reading and online adaptive IReady learning, will continue to provide screening, intervention and enrichment, and progress monitoring. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will use data and assessments to inform and adjust instruction utilizing strategies and feedback to ensure students are learning at high levels resulting in a 5 percent student performance growth on formative and summative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Updates to curriculum and units modified evident in Rubicon Atlas; Instructional plans aligned to student progress on assessments via student groups, differentiation, and student engagement activities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed x n/a n/a n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 School Quality Review and 2018 School Quality Guide the school's strengths and needs are: School Strengths  The school leader uses systems for programming for students and teachers that are aligned to student achievement for groups of students including ELL's and SWD  The school leader has taken steps to secure personnel to meet the academic and social needs of students School Needs  The school leader needs to identify additional capital resources available to the school community throughout the year and make strategic decisions to fund efforts aligned to school wide goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will work with the school community to develop and promote the school vision in order to sustain school improvement resulting in a10 percent student performance growth on formative and summative assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Within the grade team meetings and Professional Learning Communities, teachers will analyze RTI data and collection of student work aligned to assessment data. Administrators will look at evidence of support provided to students and provide feedback Teachers will utilize I-Ready to provide academic support for hispanics, economically disadvantaged, students with disabilities, English language learners, and the lowest third. These students will be tracked and monitored for academic progress to ensure that their individual needs are being met through Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Weekly Principal October 2018- June 2019 Assitant Principals Grade Team Leaders RTI Team Hispanic Quarterly Principal Economically Disadvantaged Nov 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals SWD ELL Lowest 1/3 RTI Team Teachers Related Service Providers Timely communication to parents (Progress Reports, Skedula, Parent Engagement, and Report Cards). Utilize Parent engagement time on Tuesday's to invite parents to teacher and school meetings. Parents Quarterly Principal Teachers Tuesday's Assistant Principals Students Oct 2018- June 2019 Teachers RTI Team Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Parent Communication via Pupil Path, PS 181 School App, and backpack notices Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources / Instructional Resources / Schedule Adjustments Allocations will support the schools goals of utilizing Dibels, IReady, and Scantron Performance Series to monitor student progress on baseline and benchmark assessments. Skedula and Pupil Path will allow teachers the opportunity to continuously have student performance data readily available to make any necessary instructional adjustments. In addition, Pupil Path and Rubicon will keep parents/guardians abreast of school wide curriculum and student performance in the classroom. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will work with the school community to develop and promote the school vision in order to sustain school improvement resulting in a 5 percent student performance growth on formative and summative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-Ready, Dibels, and Scantron Performance Series will be administered three times to monitor and track student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed x n/a n/a n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 School Quality Review and 2018 School Quality Guide the school's strengths and needs are: School Strengths School communicates with families via monthly grade level newsletters and Skedula/Pupil Path.   The school leader makes it a school-wide priority for all students and their families to be aware of school-wide expectations School Needs  The school needs to implement a plan to to foster conversations with students and families via face to face meetings. (Town Hall Tuesday's)  The school needs to implement a plan to support students and families with social/emotional support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. June 2019, the school will implement a vision for family engagement which results in partnerships with families as evidenced and measured by an increase in monthly parental participation from September to June, agendas, and workshop sign in sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Within their Profession Learning Communities, staff receive training on ways to improve outreach, communication skill and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. All Staff Weekly Principal Parent Coordinator Monday's Assistant Principals To address the needs of students with disabilities, English Language learners, and overage students, parents and teachers of these students are encouraged to participate and attend in all scheduled parent and school activities/meetings. These are scheduled to increase and strengthen the school home connection. Skedula/Pupil Path will be utilized by the entire school community as a tool to promote parent/teacher collaboration Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers Guidance Parent Coordinator Teachers Ongoing Principal IEP Teacher Oct 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals Guidance Parents SWD ELL Teachers Guidance Parent Coordinator Tuesday afternoons, the weekly parent time will be used to schedule informal meetings with families . In addition, scheduled open houses for specific grades will be held to provide students with an opportunity to meet with teachers and review student artifacts. Parents Weekly Principal Teachers Tuesday's Assistant Principals Students Oct 2018- June 2019 Teachers Guidance Parent Coordinator PTA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Progressive Youth Empowerment (PYE) Beacon Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources / Instructional Resources / Schedule Adjustments  Planning time for Principal, Assistant Principal. Parent Coordinator, SLT, and selected teachers during the school day. Funding allocations will support parent attendance at outreach activities, utilization of automated messaging system, and Datacation (Skedula). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. .By February 2019, the school will implement a vision for family engagement which results in partnerships with families as evidenced and measured by an increase in monthly parental participation from September to June, agendas, and workshop sign in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets will reflect an increase of parental/guardian participation at workshops and parental log on data reflecting an increase in parental access to Pupil Path. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group Saturday School Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Dibelsand Running Records. New York Ready in Grades 3-8. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Double entry journals, Guided reading Mathematics New York Ready Grades 3-8; Blended learning Small group I-Ready Science Social Studies Small group instruction, Interactive writing and research projects Project based learning and lab reports. Small group Small group instruction extended, Interactive writing and research projects Double entry journals group projects and presentations Small group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) One on one session as needed, Group Counseling,Dean, RTITeam, SIT Team, Parent Coordinator, School Psychologist, 6-8 weeks in groups Students receive additional support through pull outsupported by an additional SETSS teacher Small Group and individual counseling Differentiated Instruction RTI Saturday School Differentiated Instruction RTI Saturday School Differentiated Instruction RTI Saturday School Differentiated Instruction RTI During the school day. DifferentiatedInstruction RTI 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  of 3, 30 minute sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH population will receive but not limited to: 1) Academic Programs & educational support services 2) Basic/emergency supplies 3) Extended library hours 4) Counseling services 5) Parental involvement 6) Intervention programs access school programs 7) Transportation once student is permanently housed 8) Research based programs that benefit highly mobile students 9) Family Outreach Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). The number of students in temporary housing is 32. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Teacher assignments aligned to teaching certification  Professional Learning Communities to support professional growth  Teacher inter-visitations and school visits  The development of teachers to serve the role of Grade Team Leader  Creating a collegial atmosphere which provides a high level of support for all teachers  Attend job fairs (Teachers along with Principals)  Utilize Teacher Finder on the NYCDOE network  The use of a research based framework for enhancing professional practice will be used in short frequent cycles of classroom observation  Develop a common lens for instruction, informed by and provide evidence-based applicable feedback to ensure that teachers know what effective teaching looks like 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Tracking the feedback data through the use of Danielson Framework for Teacher Effectiveness has afforded us a method for targeting various groups and individual teachers who require targeted support in a variety of areas. We have strategically used the Teacher Development coach to support our second grade and seventh grade teachers in building collaboration skills Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Teachers in the early grades 1, 2 will be involved in the placement of children within classes and they will audit the unit planning work to ensure that the work represents the appropriate challenge with multiple entry points for students as they age up. Supplementary to this Orientation weeks will be scheduled at the end of the school year where teachers will have the chance to interact with their new students and their current teachers to facilitate appropriate changes. Last but not least portfolios from students will be transferred from current teachers to new teachers in the second week of June for review by new grade teams. As registered partners with Parent Corps, students in our early childhood program will have an easier transition to elementary as workshops are designed to provide parental support with student expectations, activities to support students at home, and to foster ongoing relationships as parents as partners within the school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our MOSL team, developed to adhere to policies connected to the Danielson Rubric, has been central to PS 181 decision-making about periodic assessment. This group of teachers is convened to discuss issues connected to assessment and its implications for school wide programming. Professional Development will be provided via weekly Professional Learning Communities to support teacher use of assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 468957 16,979 139, 027.00 103,228.00 12366.00 0 3852588 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x x x n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 5B 5A 5C 5D n/a 5A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 181 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 181 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ●Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  [ The John L. Steptoe School for the 21 st Century PS 181 ] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary Secondary Education (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The rationale for offering an after school program is to ensure that our ELLs reach proficiency in the NYSESLAT and excel academically in ELA, Math, and other content area classes. We will, as we have done in the past, provide intensive support to our ELLs to help them acquire as quickly as possible the listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills they need to perform highly in all areas. The P.S. 181 Title III After School program will focus on developing our ELLs' reading, writing, and math skills. The sessions will be taught in English using ESL strategies. The program, which is geared toward developing the academic language of the ELLs, will tend to enhance their skills in the content area subjects and prepare them for their success in the State Standardized tests. Students will work collaboratively to develop the academic language necessary to help the students become proficient in English as well in the core curriculum subject areas. To make the students perform better, we will make knowledge more accessible to students through differentiation and scaffolding methodologies depending on students’ needs, native language support ( Haitian Creole, Arabic, and Spanish dictionaries), and hands-on activities. During our sessions, we will provide our students with additional core academic, linguistic, reading comprehension, phonics, visuals, oral and aural support in the content areas to aid in the acquisition of the English language, as well as the knowledge of core academic content. In order to do this, teachers will expand or extend on oral and speaking skills that ELLs acquire in classrooms by developing and enhancing their academic vocabulary through daily oral practice activities such as think, write, pair and share, online audio/visual activities, the use of graphic organizers and thinking maps, to facilitate and condense crucial content material and language. Manipulative, accountable talk, and bilingual dictionaries will be part of each lesson and activity in the classrooms. Technology will be widely used to help our ELLs to acquire the new language much more effectively. A variety of audio/ visual activities will be made available to the students through the internet. Among the websites to be used are Brainstorm.com and the i-Ready.com which will be used repeatedly used during the Title III supplemental program. The I-Ready will be used as both a diagnostic and an instructional tool. Diverse activities will be accomplished through the use of technology such as smart boards and projectors. They are as follows: -Highlighting lines of texts so that students can follow along --Display images for brainstorming, warm up, discussion, creative writing etc. --Projection of films related to the topics covered --Surfing and displaying of websites that the entire room will see at once. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The After School sessions will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 P.M to 5: 00 P.M. It will run from November 2018 to April 2019. This current year, we will use materials which are supplemental and distinct from those used in the classrooms for daily instructions. To successfully meet our objectives, we will use different types of reading and math workbooks such as the ELA and Math versions of the Common Core Clinics, the Best Practices (ELA and Math) from Options. This year, we will also use as instructional materials the Ready New York ELA and Math books. These materials have proved to be highly successful in raising students’ Reading and Math levels in State tests. In fact, a recent study in New York shows that schools that used Ready New York had a significantly higher percentage of students achieving proficiency on the Common Core State Assessment than schools that did not use Ready New York. Using the indicated materials, our third-fourth grade bridge class will receive intensive instructions in language and vocabulary development, reading comprehension and math skills. The fourth grade students, who take the Science test, will use the Ladders To Success science books which include instructional workbooks that cover all the standards and support our curriculum in the subject area in question. For our Social studies component, we will use Rewards Plus. These books will help the students explore a variety of content area topics and use different approaches to complete the related tasks. All other grades, which include the sixth, seventh, and eighth grades, will receive instructions that enhance their ELA and Math skills and widen their knowledge in all content areas of Science and Social studies. Four teachers will be involved in the program: •3rd-6th grades EN and EM students will have one teacher. • Third-4th and 5th-6th grade TR-EX students will have 1 teacher. 7th-8th grades TR-EX ELLs will have 2 teachers. Our Title III program will be organized in the following subgroups: 1) 3rd-4th grades 5th – 6th grade- Licensed ESL instructor ( EN and EM students) ( EN and EM students) 2) 3rd-4th grade 5th– 6th grades 1 ENL bilingual teacher TR-EX students (TR-EX students) 7th - 8th grades Common Branch teacher and Bilingual teacher (TR-EX students) Our Math component of our After school program will focus on theory and practice in regards to computation and problem solving skills. Our focus will be centered on preparing SIFE, Newcomers, and beginning level students with the basic mathematical skills necessary to bring them up to grade level. The program will help students to understand and internalize the math concepts as well as learn strategies that will help them solve mathematical problems while acquiring the Mathematical Academic Vocabulary tending to lead them to achieve grade level proficiency in math. English will be the language of instruction mainly used, but translation in Spanish, French, and Creole may be provided by the bilingual teachers if the need arises. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Teachers working in this Title III after school program are licensed and qualified to teach their respective subjects. In addition, they have vast experience working with ELLs in previous Immigrant Programs and have had ELLs in their regular classrooms throughout the school year. Parents are notified about the Title III After School Program by letters in their preferred languages. Phone calls are also made by speakers of the parents' native languages to remind them of the importance for their children to take part in the program. Attendance of students’ participation is taken daily by teachers. Records of parent notifications and student attendance sheets are maintained in the file cabinets located in the ELL coordinator's office. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At P.S. 181 we provide our Title III teachers with high quality professional development necessary to help them to effectively teach our ELLs. The rationale for organizing the professional development is to teach them the skills and strategies necessary to prepare differentiated instruction lessons which will help students acquire their new language in a non-threatening environment. As a result, the students will be able to work collaboratively with each other and use accountable talk, academic vocabulary and research, as they develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. The professional Development workshops will be provided at no cost to the Title III program. These workshops will focus on strategies relative to ESL Best Practices that tend to help ELLs quickly acquire academic language. They will consist of both webinars and in-school workshops. The titles of the 3 webinars to be viewed by the teachers are: "Effective Literacy Instruction for ELLs," "Inside the Brain of a Struggling Reader" "Build the ELL Brain." Our Assistant principals will also present several workshops relative to the linguistic and the academic development of our ELLs. Some of the workshops which will be presented are scheduled as follows: November 2018 Workshop Title: "The use of ESL strategies such as TPR, Whole Language, Language Experience, and Natural Approach at the beginning stages of language acquisition" January 2019 Workshop Title: "How to Use Scaffolding and Differentiation in the ESL class: • How to provide ELLs with support such as collaborative groups, peer teaching, project based learning and technology, continued implementation of Literacy strategies such (phonemic awareness taught through content) February 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part C: Professional Development Workshop Title: How to align Common Core Standards for ENTERING English Learners (Middle School) • Supporting ELLs through valuable websites. The Professional Development records, which include agendas and attendance sheets, will be kept in ELL binders which are to be maintained in the ELL records cabinets. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We, at P.S. 181, believe that parent involvement not only brings school and parents closer, but it also helps to improve their child’s education. Consequently, parents who work closely with the school, will greatly participate in their child’s studies and see the culmination of higher performance in student’s work. At the beginning of the year, parents are invited by the ESL teachers to attend ELL Parent Orientation meetings that inform them on the language programs available to their child. After viewing The Title III Parental Choice video in the Parent’s language, they get the opportunity to select a program of their choice for their child. The Parent coordinator, ESL teachers, and Assistant Principals participate in the ELL Parent Orientation meeting and inform parents of the various programs available for their children at our school and other schools closed to their home. The parents also have an opportunity to view their child’s previous year’s test scores and learn how to interpret them. They are also informed of how they can help their child at home, and receive help within the school and out of the school to improve weak areas. In addition, they become familiar with programs within the school pertinent to their children’s success in this academic year. As part of our commitment to get parents to actively be involved in their children's education, we have planned several activities which will be of general interest to parents. In fact, We will organize an Adult Saturday ESL program geared toward helping parents acquire the English language. During the Saturday sessions, parents will have an opportunity to acquire listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Parents will be introduced to interactive websites to build their listening skills while learning certain social and language survival skills. Some of the websites to be used are: www.Starfall.com, www. Free-phonics. Worksheets.com, and www. Reading a-z.com. They will use Longman ESL dictionaries and workbooks. The Longman dictionaries will be used to teach students the language necessary for immediate survival skills. The pictures are categorized under headings, such as clothes, public transportation, supermarket, the kitchen and the hospital, among others. These dictionaries have theme-based topics with pictures that bring the new language to other real life day-to-day experiences. With the visuals and the new vocabulary used in sentences, students will ultimately retain the words needed to communicate successfully and will facilitate their acculturation process. In addition, these dictionaries cover basic grammar points in classroom activities. These adult students will also be exposed to the computer. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Since a clear and effective communication is essential for a fair collaboration between school and parents, we take the translation issue very seriously. We will use all means available to reach parents and to disseminate information to them in their native languages in written form. Letters will be sent home in the parents' native languages announcing the eventual organization of the different activities for parents. Communications will be also disseminated over the phone, during Parent Teacher Conferences, during PTA Meetings, and at the end of the school day when parents pick up their children from school. In an effort to correctly communicate information to parents we often urge oral translators to participate at each meeting in order to translate to parents who do not understand English. The parent engagement activities will run on a total of at lest three Saturdays. The days are scheduled as follows: Saturday February 2019 from 10:00 AM to 12:00 PM Saturday February 2019 from 10:00 AM to 12:00 PM Saturday March 2019 from 10:00 AM to 12:00 PM Saturday March 2019 from 10:00 AM to 12:00 PM These activities, we believe, satisfy the PS 181's objective to periodically hold Saturday Math, Reading, and writing workshops for parents to enable them to academically help their children at home. Records of these activities, including agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations to parents, are safely maintained in folders in the file cabinets located in the ELL classrooms. There will be a culminating activity in the Spring from 9 - 1 p.m. where parents and students will come together and share their written work and projects that they’ve produced throughout the program. It will also be a multicultural event where parents will bring favorite cultural dishes and share key aspects of their culture. All five teachers in the Title III program will coordinate and participate in the culminating activity. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $8,401.44. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 teachersx 2 hours x 45.66 23 days = $8,401.44 TOTAL: $8,401.44 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. A. Workbook: Ready New York CCLS (READING) 1. 3rd grade 9780760983904 16 X 12.99 = $207.84 2. 4th grade 9780760983911 12 X $12.99 = $ 155.88 3. 5th grade 9780760983928 14 X $ 12.99 = $181.86 4. 6th grade 9780760983935 10 X $ 12.99 = $ 129.90 5. 7th grade 9780760983942 16 X $12.99= $207.84 6. 8th grade 9780760983959 12X $12.99 = $ 155.88 TOTAL: $ 1039.20 B. Workbook: Ready New York CCLS (Math) 1. 3rd grade 9780760984321 16 X 12.99 = $207.84 2. 4th grade 9780760984338 12 X $12.99 = $ 155.81 3. 5th grade 9780760984345 14 X $ 12.99 = $181.86 4. 6th grade 9780760984352 10 X $ 12.99 = $ 129.90 5. 7th grade 9780760984369 16 X $12.99 = $ 207.84 6. 8th grade 9780760984369 12X $12.99 = $ 155.88 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL: $ 1,039.20 TOTAL for ELA and Math books = $ 1,039.20 X 2 = $ 2,078.40 $1,886.16 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Parental involvement/ESL and parent luncheon 2teachersx2hrsx 8daysx45.66= $1,461.12 + 425.04 (Parent Luncheon) Total: $1,886.16 12,366.00 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name John Steptoe School of the 21 st Centur Borough Brooklyn School Number 181 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Essanasson Victor Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Delmas /Ms. Lora Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Lisowski Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Conolly Related-Service Provider Ms. Pryam Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Ms. Kathleen Glover Coach type here School Counselor Ms. Laguerre, Parent Kerline Altenord Parent Coordinator Mr. Keith Grady Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Ms. Iroku, Counselor C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 788 Total number of ELLs 103 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.07% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the John Steptoe School of the 21st Century (PS 181K), we use different assessment tools such as Fountas and Pinnel, Dibels, Foundations, and GMRT to assess students from pre-K to 2nd grade. The Fountas and Pinnel Benchmark Assessment measures their decoding, encoding, vocabulary, fluency, reading comprehension, and writing skills. This assessment is administered by the classroom teachers to each individual student in their class. The purpose of this assessment helps in the designing of instruction relating to the students' developmental reading levels. Determining the students' independent and instructional reading levels aids teachers in grouping students in small groups, including guided reading, independent reading, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  and differentiated instruction in their classrooms. The assessment in question also helps teachers select challenging texts and identify students who need intervention, or extra support. Additionally, it creates class profiles, and documents student progress across a school year and across grade levels. Dibels assess students' knowledge of word recognition and reading fluency as well as their ability to retell stories in their own words.; Foundations measures phonemic awareness and assesses students' capability of writing in sentences and in forming supported paragraphs. The GMRT focuses on the assessment of vocabulary comprehension in context and the correlation of pictures and words. Students in grades three- to-eight use a combination of the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, the ELA, Math, and Science assessments. From the results of these assessments, we have come to identify our students' strength and weaknesses in specific academic areas. In addition, teachers use the results of these assessments to do their instructional planning. During their grade conferences, teachers analyze the data results and discuss formal and informal test results to plan instruction collaboratively. Based on these assessments, instruction is planned in view of meeting students' individual needs through the use of differentiated instruction. It is a practice at P.S. 181 for the leadership committee, and the ESL teachers to meet with mainstream classroom teachers throughout the year and especially after the results of each assessment, to analyze and discuss students' test results, develop the necessary skills that will enable the students to be successful in their classrooms and to grow linguistically and academically. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, They use a varied amount of strategies to help these students with the challenging task of learning a new language while at the same time overcoming the learning difficulties they may have in their own languages too. Some strategies used are: teaching across language, use of graphic organizers to facilitate content, condensing content material into thinking maps, summarizing information, repeating information, slower articulation, hands-on activities, provide native language support, explicit phonics instruction, teaching cognates and the relationship between both languages, preparing academic vocabulary activities, games, flashcards, internet use (extended learning through technology), visuals, peer support, chanting, drawing, writing, among others help these students to be able to re-word text in simple sentences, the use of listening centers with a plethora of CDs and books on tape, music, and chanting, among others. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the programs for our ELLs are measured through the growth in their oral expression, comprehension of oral language, reading comprehension, and writing skills development. Students' class works (portfolios), group works (projects), oral presentation as well as the comparison of their raw scores in all their NYC/state exams from one year to the next is indicative of the program's success or failures. For the most part, programs that explicitly address the needs of our ELLs take into account differentiation of instruction, incorporation of ESL strategies and methodologies and are rich in academic language. The programs are rigorously lean on high expectations, facilitate core content knowledge, allowing student discovery and learning in a way that they can become very successful academically. By analyzing the data in progress reports such as NYSESLAT, Periodic Assessments, ELA, Math, and students’ work in the classroom, we have observed that several students in the 6th and 4th grade didn’t reach their AYP. In the 6th grade 8 out of 11 students didn’t reach their AYP, regardless of their NL. Out of those 11 students 1 is a long term ELL, and 3 have had 4-5 years of service. In the 4th grade we had similar results with 7 students out of 14 not reaching their AYP. This poses specific instructional issues and challenges with regard to the AYP. This data helps us to strategically target these students for extra support during the Title III After-school Programs. We identify some of the differing characteristics by classifying ELLs in three groups: newly arrived with adequate schooling, newly arrived with limited formal schooling, and long-term English learners. The data from these assessments indicates that we need to provide these ELLs with more intensive and challenging instruction, collaboration, and validation of students' home and life experiences, set rigorous goals that support students to meet grade-level standards, evaluate growth frequently, and increase intensity of instruction when growth is less than expected. In addition, teachers need to have higher expectations and motivate students to reach the desired goals by conferencing one on one with students weekly, and setting individual goals. Moreover, we need to reach high standards by 2018. More importantly, communication between home and school is ongoing throughout the school year. Teachers meet 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  with parents during: Saturday teacher/parent workshops, after school, during teacher preps, or speak over the phone to inform parents on their child's success and needs as well as ways they can help their child at home. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures to be adopted are as follows: We will repeatedly use strategies that will help these students respond and practice the challenging task of learning the academic language of all content area subjects while they are learning the language functions and structures of the English language . Some strategies used are: teaching across language, use of graphic organizers to facilitate content, condensing content material into thinking maps, summarizing information, repeating information, slower articulation, hands-on activities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Instruction is adjusted and modified to expand their competencies and prior knowledge. Teachers explicitly plan and target their language development early by incorporating differentiated teaching strategies in their lessons throughout the day.Thus, they incorporate high quality instructional strategies. Through our experience with working with ELLs, we have become aware of the fact that students come with varying degrees of formal educational experiences, and or educational gaps from their native countries. Due to this, teachers incorporate high quality educational strategies to move students through tiers I, II and III instructional levels by providing these students with additional core academic, linguistic, reading comprehension, as well as phonics, visual, oral and aural support in the content areas to aid in the acquisition of English language, as well as the knowledge of core academic content. In order to do this, teachers extend and strengthen ELLs' oral and speaking language instruction in classrooms by developing and enhancing their academic vocabulary through daily oral practice activities, such as think- write-pair-share, online audio/visual activities, content area books with tapes, CDs, repetition through chants and songs, re-reading, teacher made flashcard games, development of their cognate awareness, the use of graphic organizers and thinking maps, the facilitation and condensation crucial content material and language. Moreover, teachers activate schema, scaffold, use multicultural books, and use Native Language support from peers in the classroom. They use questioning techniques that motivate oral expression and practice, in addition to role playing. Fluency development is enhanced by choral reading, individual reading aloud, and or peer reading aloud, and debates, among others. Comprehension of oral reading is acquired through teacher questioning which promotes understanding and prompts critical thinking and analysis through discussions and debates with peers, among others. To help ELLs acquire the academic writing skills they need in the content areas, teachers give them daily writing practice which respond to open ended questions posed during class discussions. Teachers use scaffolding strategies such as the KWL charts and graphic organizers, and have students do extensive research in order to respond to a writing prompt. In addition, they use the language experience approach, such as anchor charts which is based on student’s response to reading, summaries, retelling, classroom discussions, dialogue journals where the teacher models correct writing conventions, correct use of grammar and spelling. Words and grammar are taught through reading and writing activities and not in isolation. Teachers incorporate real life (Realia) interactive activities in their classrooms to teach students to solve and analyze math word problems. Activities such as asking students to bring in their favorite native food recipes, and the use of mathematical skills such as weighing, measuring, counting, adding, among others to provide the appropriate amount of food servings and nutrition. Or, by incorporating store-play in the classroom, where students purchase play candy, clothes, and school supplies with play (fake) monies, and tie these math concepts and computation skills to their personal real life experiences, and to enhance their reading, and math skills: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT show the levels of the language acquisition by the ELLs. From 23 newly admitted students who took the NYSITELL between Fall of 2016 and Spring of 2017, 17 scored at an Entering level, 3 at a Transitioning level, 2 at an Expanding level, and 1 at a Commanding level. The NYSESLAT scores for our elementary grades reveal that out of 14 first grade students 8 have an Entering level, 2 have an EX level, 1 is EM, and 3 are TR. From our 7 second grade students, 4 are Entering, 1 moved up to an EM level, 1 went up to a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  TR level, while 1remained at an Expanding level. 6 out of our 14 third grade students are at an EN level, 2 went up to an EM level, 1 at a TR level, and 5 moved up to an advanced (EX) level. In the fourth grade, 6 students out of 21 are at an EN level, 5 at an EM level, 7 attained a TR level, and 3 went up to an EX level. In the 5th grade, 4 out of 11 students are EN students, 2 moved up to EM level, 2 attained a TR level, and 3 attained an EX level. The data patterns across proficiency levels on the Spring 2016 NYSESLAT for our Junior High School reveal that in the sixth grade there are 2 EN students,3 students moved up to a TR level, and 2 students attained the EX level. Out of 6th graders, 8 are advanced (EX), 2 are EN, and 1 is intermediate (TR). This data also reveals that 1 out of the 11 students are long term ELLs. The trend in the 7th grade is that there are more students attaining an Advanced (EX) level than the EN and EM levels. 7 out of 11 students are advanced (EX), 1 is intermediate (TR), 1 emerging, and 2 beginners. In the 8th grade 4 out of 9 students attained an advanced level (EX), 3 went up one level (EM), and 2 are beginners. For the majority of the students who took the NYSESLAT we noticed that their raw score in reading comprehension went up slightly. Consequently, we will plan on continuing to enhance reading, fluency, and comprehension strategies, and also work more on strengthening their writing skills by responding to non-fiction reading texts and literature. These writing activities will include the use the writing process, graphic organizers to outline and organize their ideas, rubrics that will guide them to develop and strengthen their weaker areas, bilingual dictionaries, and most importantly, one on one conferencing with the teachers. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As soon as the test scores (NYSESLAT /NYSITELL are known, all teachers and administrators are handed a hard copy. Schedules are then set up for meetings. The ENL teachers often meet with all teachers and administrators to discuss and analyze the test results and make appropriate academic plan that will lead to the success of our English language learners. Our discussions and analysis usually focus around techniques relating to language acquisition, ESL best practices, and the use of differentiated instruction in the classroom. Every year, the ENL teachers also compile materials and distribute them to classroom teachers. These materials, which mainly focus on language functions, are used by the teachers to support the EN and EM ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 181 offers a freestanding ESL program model. We have two certified ESL teachers that do both Pull-Out and push in models. Students in our pull out model are grouped heterogeneously. We group them by their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL level (homogeneously), by two consecutive grades. Students are picked up from their classrooms by the ESL teacher. They are pulled out during gym, music, or art, and are serviced in 90 minutes blocks. The ESL instruction is content based, using ESL methodologies and strategies. The use of differentiated instruction is implemented. Students work in small groups where interaction and participation among group members is necessary to complete assigned projects. Academic language is practiced through accountable talk, and teacher made activities. Internet research projects, visuals, anchor charts, video clips, and graphic organizers, enhance student content and language learning. Speaking, listening, reading and writing are incorporated in every lesson. Classroom teachers and the ESL teacher meet weekly to plan lessons collaboratively. In the push-in model, school organization and structure is maximized for ample collaboration and planning time among teachers. The mainstream teacher and the ESL teacher work collaboratively. They plan lessons together, all of which meet the curriculum alignment and incorporates strategies and methodologies that support the different leveled ELLs in that classroom. Instruction is rigorous and challenging, but not frustrating. Activities such as pair, think 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  share, accountable talk, hands on activities, realia, visuals, videos, graphic organizers, debates, technology based projects, among others, are incorporated. b. TBE program. If applicable. No TBE is offered by PS 181 c. DL program. If applicable. We have no DL at PS 181. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to service all students to their utmost learning advantage we group students by levels in the following way: we include two instructional components (90 minute blocks) of language arts instruction five times a week, including ELA and ESL . ELA is provided by the content area teachers for two block periods a day. ESL service is provided by the ESL licensed teacher as mandated by the NYS Department of Education. ELLs at the beginning and intermediate levels of language acquisition receive 360 minutes of ESL per week in four 90 minute-blocks. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes a week of ESL in two 90 minute-blocks. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In each ESL program model, classes are aligned with the state and city Common Core Standards. ESL students are taught in English through the core academic content areas. ESL teachers and mainstream teachers meet once a week during their common preps to prepare lessons in the content areas, to plan and facilitate the learning of academic language and content through activating schema, scaffolding, differentiated instruction, interactive technology activities, the use of visuals, use of varied leveled texts on the same topic, and a plethora of audio, (eg. chants, songs, books with tapes/cd, interactive computer programs, read-aloud, peer read aloud, accountable talk, think-pair-share,) games, realia, the use of over head projectors, manipulatives, group work, group research, student presentations, role play, modeling, think aloud, modeling, the use of realia, and hands-on activities. Students are pulled out from their mainstream classrooms and serviced in two period blocks. They are grouped by language levels and preferably in one or two consecutive grades. ESL students are taught through content following the mainstream classroom curriculum, by grade. To lessen culture shock, and assist in content comprehension, students speaking the same NL are paired. In addition, the use of glossaries, bi-lingual dictionaries, bilingual thesaurus, and a varied amount of leveled texts in Haitian Creole and Spanish (our predominant students' Native languages). These books are available for use in the classroom and to borrow. Also, pedagogues and teachers speaking the same NL as the student assist beginning level students in content comprehension, and aid in evaluating student' s NL summaries, and feedback. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who are at a beginners or low intermediate level in their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT use bilingual dictionaries, bilingual books, and Internet programs in their native language to acquire content, and lessen culture shock while they become acculturated. This temporary support during the BICS stage (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills), is necessary to make their transition less difficult and stressful, until they acquire more English language dominance/proficiency to work independently. At this beginning stage of language acquisition, the two ESL teachers, one who is bilingual Spanish, and the other French/Haitian Creole, and an Arabic speaking Physical Therapist at our school, assist in evaluating student's work in their Native Language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6. a) Students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) are given additional support in reading, Science, Social Studies, and Math. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, Science, and Math as follows: they participate in our Title III after-school programs and our Saturday Math Academy. Teachers go over, and scaffold lessons taught in class to ensure that students comprehend the lessons taught in class that day. The Title III after-school offers 3 classes: one beginner/newcomer class for grades 3 through 8th grades, one intermediate-advanced class from 4th through 5th, and one intermediate-advanced class from 6th to 8th grades. This program focuses on developing listening, speaking and reading skills through the use of content area materials and use different leveled texts, technology, audio and visuals, graphic organizer, hands on activities, and chants among others. The Math Academy is given by a bilingual Haitian-Creole teacher and offers the student the opportunity to work in leveled groups with manipulatives, interactive math CD-ROMS, math table games, graphs, and direct teacher instruction. In all cases, teachers scaffold their lessons, use manipulatives, visuals, technology, leveled texts, offer extra practice materials, and group student with a bi-lingual NL peer. Our goal is to have these SIFE students bridge the gap, and with our additional support and help, reach grade level performance. SIFE students are encouraged to attend extended day, After-school programs, and Saturday Academies to help them gain the additional knowledge they need in the core subject areas. All additional supporting is taught in English with the assistance of bi-lingual peers, bi-lingual educational assistants, or bi-lingual pedagogues, when available. 6. b ) Newcomers are serviced for 360 minutes every week, including 180 minutes of push-ins and 180 minutes of pull-outs. They are constantly immersed in an abundant amount of audio, aural, and visual support as well as content area instruction using scaffolding and differentiated instruction methodologies. Also newcomers are offered and encouraged to attend the entire additional program available to the regular student body. They are invited to attend the Beacon after-school program 5 days a week from 3:00-6:00 where homework help, sports, and participation in dance, games with peers will facilitate the acculturation process. In addition they attend our Title III After-school program where they get additional help in phonics development, listening, speaking, reading, and writing, in the content areas. Mainstream classroom teachers work collaboratively with the ESL teachers to facilitate the assimilation of classroom content material, concentrating on academic language and rigor, utilizing visuals, computer interactive websites and programs, peer grouping, and peer collaboration, to aid in the learning process, acculturation, and language development. Additionally, Newcomers participate in all reading, math, social studies, and science test-practices given by classroom teachers and or Kaplan, in preparation for state and city assessments. High expectations and academic rigor are held for all students, including ELLs . Participation in class assignments, homework, projects and presentations are equally expected from ELLs as well as from the rest of the classroom. The ESL teachers are actively involved in providing additional materials, computer inter active software, and in scaffolding content to meet the academic demands of the classroom. Moreover, classroom teachers encourage and request communication with parents of ELLs, either by phone or in person, so that the home becomes involved in the academic rigor, demands of the school, and the academic and language progress and needs of the student. Translators/interpreters are used to facilitate parent/teacher communication. 6. c) Ells who have been in a U.S. school from four to six years are encouraged to attend any extra academic support programs, including the After-School program offered daily from 3:00PM to 6:00PM, our Title III after-school content area reading program, and our Saturday Academy. They receive additional academic support, at varying degrees of difficulty, from the ESL teacher to help them bridge the language and content gap and achieve academically as well as their classroom peers. Also, the mainstream classroom teacher works collaboratively with the ESL teachers to prepare same content lessons when the ELL student is pulled out for ESL. Additional scaffolding and support is given for the continued development of reading comprehension and writing activities. 6. d) Looking at the formal and informal test results of Long Term ELLs help identify patterns and informs us as to why students are not becoming proficient. We then focus developing rigorous instruction, enriching language development, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  academic concepts and skills. We work with these long term ells to strengthen their weaker areas and enhancing their stronger ones. ESL teachers co-teach in mainstream classrooms and incorporate project based learning. We meet periodically to track students progress. Mainstream teachers and ESL teachers have high expectations for all ELLs, and motivate them to become interdependent , critical thinkers, by setting group goals, grouping them with peers who are more English dominant, involving them in project based learning, and participating in debates where academic language, reading, and writing, are used. teach new language sound, total physical response lots of practice. Former ELLs, who exited ELL status, will continue to receive support from the ESL program for up to two years. Former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. The half unit of ESL/ENL or services monitor and support the student’s language development and academic progress. Due to their language proficiency, the former ELLs will be exposed to more complex non-fiction texts as well as literary works requiring oral and written responses through discussions, critical thinking and opinion pieces. Although taught with current ELLs, the former ELLs will be challenged in ways that push them to excel linguistically and academically. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers, as well as our alternate placement paraprofessionals use strategies and methods that help this specific population of students, ELL-SWD's, develop the necessary skills to be successful in their classrooms and to grow linguistically and academically. They use a varied amount of strategies to help these students with the challenging task of learning a new language while at the same time overcoming the learning difficulties they may have in their own languages too. Some strategies used are: teaching across language, use of graphic organizers to facilitate content, condensing content material into thinking maps, summarizing information, repeating information, slower articulation, hands-on activities, provide native language support, explicit phonics instruction, teaching cognates and the relationship between both languages, preparing academic vocabulary activities, games, flashcards, internet use (extended learning through technology), visuals, peer support, chanting, drawing, writing, among others help these students to be able to re-word text in simple sentences, , the use of listening centers with a plethora of CD's and books on tape, music, and chanting, among others. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P. S. 181 offers equity and access to equal education for different ELL populations, we create a rigorous learning environment that focuses on academic achievement, language development, and cross-cultural support. ELL-SWDs are grouped together with mainstream ELLs in compliance with the least restrictive environment. Groupings vary depending on their NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores. All students are exposed to the same learning environment, strategies, and methodologies. Materials and activities are differentiated by student's needs in accordance to their test scores and their IEP recommendations. Learning centers provide SWD's access to materials and resources to meet their learning styles, as stated in their IEP. ELLs who are also students with disabilities (SWD) receive accommodations that apply both to ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. ELLs with disabilities are not exempted from the NYSESLAT, and may use the test modifications and accommodations as detailed on their IEP when taking the NYSESLAT (and as permitted in the School Administrator’s Manual for the test). ELL status cannot be the determinant factor for special education eligibility. Response to Intervention (RTI) approaches should be applied to ELL students who enter with lower levels of proficiency in the home language, or if anticipated progress is not noted after a reasonable time period. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies taught in our ESL class are as follows: Newcomers and Long Term ELLs who need additional help in these subjects participate in our Title III after-school programs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  and our Saturday Math Academy. In addition, the Seventh grade and 6th grade Math teachers provide tutoring to these students for 40 minutes in the mornings before classes begin. During the Title III After school programs, teachers re-teach, review, and scaffold to ensure that students comprehend the lessons taught in class that day. The Title III after-school program meets two days a week from December to March and offers 3 classes: one beginner/newcomer class of 3-6th grades, one intermediate-advanced class from 4th through 5th, and one intermediate-advanced class from 4th through 5th, and another intermediate-advanced class from 6th to 8th grades. These classes are taught in English, and the program focuses on developing academic language through the content area. These are taught through the development of listening, speaking, and reading skills. Students use a varied selection of different leveled texts in the same content area theme. They also use interactive DVD computer programs, and research the Internet to complete projects. Students also work in the listening centers, listening to stories on CD’, music books, phonic games, and memory games to develop their listening and speaking skills. All our classes involve the use of manipulatives, realia or visuals, graphic organizers, and thinking maps. Our Math Academy is given by a bilingual Haitian-Creole Math teacher and offers the student the opportunity to work in leveled groups with manipulatives, interactive math CD-ROMS, Math table games, graphs, and direct teacher instruction. In all cases, teachers scaffold their lessons, use manipulatives, visuals, technology, leveled texts, offer extra practice materials, and group students with a bi-lingual NL peer. The Title III After-school program is designed to provide intervention too our ELLs by teaching them content area subjects and academic language necessary for them to succeed in their mainstream classes. Our Saturday Math academy is ungraded and unleveled. There are five subgroups 2-4 grade, 5-6 grade, and 7-8th grade. The teacher is multilingual in English, French and Haitian Creole. Also during the months of January and February we have a team of professionals from Kaplan who teach Math and Language Arts test preparation skills to students. We have a math specialist who goes into the classroom and teaches math several periods a week, as well as an ELA specialist who also goes into the classroom to teach Language Arts. We also have Beacon Program which provides all students, including ELLs with homework help, and recreational activities, such as sports, drama, and dancing. These meet in small groups of 15-18 students by grade. To meet our goals, we will use Ready New York ELA and Math books. These materials have proven to be highly successful in raising students’ Reading and math levels in State tests. In fact, a recent study in New York shows that schools that used Ready New York had a significantly higher percentage of students achieving proficiency on the new 2015 Common Core State Assessment than schools that did not use Ready New York. We will direct our program on enhancing the reading and the math skills of all our ELLs. Our second-third grade bridge class will receive intensive instructions in language and vocabulary development, reading comprehension and math skills. The fourth graders and the fifth graders, who both take the State Science Test, will use the Ladders To Success science books which include instructional workbooks that cover all the standards and support our curriculum in the subject areas in question. These books will help the students to explore a variety of content area topics and use different approaches to related complete the related tasks. All other grades, which include the sixth, seventh, and eighth grades, will receive instructions that enhance their ELA and Math skills and widen their knowledge in all content areas of Science and Social studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will consider applying for a SIFE grant to continue to meet and enhance our Long Term Ells needs. In addition, staff development on differentiating instruction for Ells in their regular mainstream classrooms will be implemented. We will continue with these programs to ensure that our students continue to grow academically, linguistically, socially, become more independent learners. Last year, we added an additional teacher to our Title III after school program, for a total of 3 teachers, so that more students could participate in this after school program. Again, this year we will offer this additional teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or ESL services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all supplemental, and after school programs/services at our school. All our parents , receive letters informing, and inviting students to attend and participate in all school programs offered during and after school, and weekends. These letters are sent home in the main languages of English, Haitian Creole, and sent home. The support programs offered at our school are: After-School Title III program, Title I, Beacon After-School Homework Help program, and our Saturday Academies and other social weekend programs. They are notified of all the available programs, and encouraged to take advantage In addition, they are encouraged to participate in the local library’s programs as well as other community activities available. The parent coordinator ensures that bilingual parents are informed of these activities by sending information and invitations on workshops in parent's native language. The parent coordinator and ESL teachers work collaboratively to ensure that ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. The after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in our building are: The Beacon Homework Help program which runs weekdays from 3PM to 6PM. This program offers services to students who need help with their homework. Other services, including our Title III After-School Program, the Saturday Math and ELA Academies, Saturday Sports programs (individual girls and boys basketball, boy and girl scouts, dance and art classes) all benefit our ELLs in ways that greatly improve their academic and social skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used in our ESL classrooms are as follows: Newcomers and Beginning ELLs in the ESL classroom use: books with audio CDs/tapes, mini-books, poems, and songs on CDs, Lakeshore son Bank, Reading Rod’s with reading machine, ELL Listen Chant and Sing set, Phonics Reading Program Scholastic, Award Reading Program, this includes readers and interactive DVD program, multilevel English, Haitian Creole, and Spanish reading library, interactive CD-Rom books from River Deep, Santillana Intensive English, Access Newcomers Building Literacy Through Learning, Starfall, Raz Kidz computer reading program, Skills-tutor Reading and Math programs. In addition students listen and sing to an array of music CD;s and Tapes to develop listening and speaking skills such as Chants by Carolyn Graham, Picture Dictionaries with tapes/CDs interactive computer math programs at different levels, crossword puzzles, memory games and other activities to re-enforce vocabulary. We incorporate kinesthetic activities which involve student movement, such as hands on activities and learning centers, role play, vocabulary games, and matching words with illustrations. Intermediate and Advanced students in the ESL classroom use: Writing Activity Standards Based books Levels 3b, Skills tutor computer activities by grade level, High Point Hampton-Brown Success in Language, Literature, Content. Saddleback Publishing Writing Levels 1 through 2 which include grammar work, building vocabulary through the use of synonyms, homonyms, antonyms, developing reading strategies, reading fiction and non-fiction in different genres, content based readings and current event articles, language arts, poetry practice, writing activities, paraphrasing, editing (story starters, writing prompts) and methodologies. Common Core Clinics by Options grades 3-8th . Thomson and Heinle adapted versions of classic readers: 80 days Around the World, Aesop’s Fables, Biography of Benjamin Franklin, The Call of the Wild, Frankenstein, Alice in Wonderland, among others. The materials used with each group of students vary according to the NYSESLAT level or LAB-R levels of language proficiency. Content materials: Visions Language, Literature, Content in levels: Basic, Introductory, and Advanced texts, workbooks with audio CD. Cosmic Geometry interactive CD, Number Heroes by River Deep interactive CD, River Deep interactive science CD, Living Book’s interactive animated stories; Stellaluna, and Arthur’s Birthday. Reading Options for Achievement (science, social studies, and language arts) Levels A through H. Pearson Learning & Core Knowledge History & Geography sets. Student desk maps and class globes, Shining Star texts and workbooks by Longman, ESL Accelerating English Language Learning by Scott Foresman levels 1-5. These materials are supplementary to classroom textbooks which are also used in the ESL classroom. United States History and New York History by Holt MacDoughal, High Point by Hampton and Brown levels A&B. Math Options Books in levels 1 through 6, Approach and Connect Math strategies with problem solving and assessment levels A-H by Options Publishers. Writer’s Thesaurus and Dictionaries in English and Haitian Creole and Spanish, curriculum associates and other publishers, and 3b Standards based reading and activity books. In addition to these materials, we use supplemental resources in the Internet, and multitude of books in the content areas, from scholastic, curriculum associates and other publishers. Measuring UP to the New York State Learning Standards Level D, Level D Science. For ELA we use Saddleback High Interest Reading Comprehension in levels 3-5, Opening Doors Reading and Writing Activity Standards Based 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  books level 3b, Skill’s tutor computer activities by grade level in reading and math, High Point Hampton and Brown Success in Language, Literature and Content. Saddleback Publishing Levels 1-2 which include grammar, building vocabulary through the use of synonyms, homonyms, developing reading strategies, reading fiction and non-fiction in different genres, content based readings and current event articles, language arts, poetry practice, writing activities, paraphrasing, editing (story starters, writing prompts) and methodologies. Thomson and Heinle adapted versions of classic readers: 80 Days Around the World, Aesop’s Fables, Biography of Benjamin Franklin, The Call of the Wild, Frankenstein, Alice in Wonderland. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native or home language support is delivered in the following ways: When feasable, students are placed in a regular mainstream classroom with a NL bilingual teacher, or with a NL speaking buddy, or a NL speaking educational assistant. Teachers also have students research content material in their NL online. Bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses, and bilingual books are available in our ESL library. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels, but more importantly to their language and academic levels also. Alternate placement paras work with individual students as assigned by their IEP to translate, reinforce content and linguistically- prone materials. Our varied libraries and extended learning through techonology support, go on, below, and beyond their grade levels, bridging the gap, if any, to make content comprehensible for them. Rubrics that integrate ELA and ESL performance standards for writing are used in compliance with the students for the common core requirements. Students work jointly on academic projects through multiple collaborative venues. Teachers form professional learning communities collaborate with each other in several configurations to reflect on, plan, and compare results of implementation. We Integrate thematic and project-based learning for heterogeneous groups of ELLs. Integrated academic language development and literacy in content areas are taught through the use of scaffolding and ESL strategies respond to student's age, grade levels and test scores. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used in our ESL classrooms are as follows: Newcomers and Beginning ELLs in the ESL classroom use: books with audio CDs/tapes, mini-books, poems, and songs on CDs, Lakeshore son Bank, Reading Rod’s with reading machine, ELL’s Listen Chant and Sing set, Phonics Reading Program Scholastic, Award Reading Program, this includes readers and interactive DVD program, multilevel English, Haitian Creole, and Spanish reading library, interactive CD-Rom books from River Deep, Santillana Intensive English, Access Newcomers Building Literacy Through Learning, Starfall, Raz Kidz computer reading program, Skills-tutor Reading and Math programs. In addition students listen and sing to an array of music CD;s and Tapes to develop listening and speaking skills such as Chants by Carolyn Graham, Picture Dictionaries with tapes/CDs interactive computer math programs at different levels, crossword puzzles, memory games and other activities to re-enforce vocabulary. We incorporate kinesthetic activities which involve student movement, such as hands on activities and learning centers, role play, vocabulary games, and matching words with illustrations. Intermediate and Advanced students in the ESL classroom use: Writing Activity Standards Based books Levels 3b, Skills tutor computer activities by grade level, High P:oint Hampton-Brown Success in Language, Literature, Content. Saddleback Publishing Writing Levels 1 through 2 which include grammar work, building vocabulary through the use of synonyms, homonyms, antonyms, developing reading strategies, reading fiction and non-fiction in different genres, content based readings and current event articles, language arts, poetry practice, writing activities, paraphrasing, editing (story starters, writing prompts) and methodologies. Common Core Clinics by Options grades 3-8th . Thomson and Heinle adapted versions of classic readers: 80 days Around the World, Aesop’s Fables, Biography of Benjamin Franklin, The Call of the Wild, Frankenstein, Alice in Wonderland, among others. The materials used with each group of students vary according to the NYSESLAT level or LAB-R levels of language proficiency. Content materials: Visions Language, Literature, Content in levels: Basic, Introductory, and Advanced texts, workbooks with audio CD. Cosmic Geometry interactive CD, Number Heroes by River Deep interactive CD, River Deep interactive science CD, Living Book’s interactive animated stories; Stellaluna, and Arthur’s Birthday. Reading Options for Achievement (science, social studies, and language arts) Levels A through H. Pearson Learning & Core Knowledge History & Geography sets. Student desk 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  maps and class globes, Shining Star texts and workbooks by Longman, ESL Accelerating English Language Learning by Scott Foresman levels 1-5. These materials are supplementary to classroom textbooks which are also used in the ESL classroom. United States History and New York History by Holt MacDoughal, High Point by Hampton and Brown levels A&B. Math Options Books in levels 1 through 6, Approach and Connect Math strategies with problem solving and assessment levels A-H by Options Publishers. Writer’s Thesaurus and Dictionaries in English and Haitian Creole and Spanish, curriculum associates and other publishers, and 3b Standards based reading and activity books. In addition to these materials, we use supplemental resources in the internet, and multitude of books in the content areas, from scholastic, curriculum associates and other publishers. Measuring UP to the New York State Learning Standards Level D, Level D Science. For ELA we use Saddleback High Interest Reading Comprehension in levels 3-5, Opening Doors Reading and Writing Activity Standards Based books level 3b, Skill’s tutor computer activities by grade level in reading and math, High Point Hampton and Brown Success in Language, Literature and Content. Saddleback Publishing Levels 1-2 which include grammar, building vocabulary through the use of synonyms, homonyms, developing reading strategies, reading fiction and non-fiction in different genres, content based readings and current event articles, language arts, poetry practice, writing activities, paraphrasing, editing (story starters, writing prompts) and methodologies. Thomson and Heinle adapted versions of classic readers: 80 Days Around the World, Aesop’s Fables, Biography of Benjamin Franklin, The Call of the Wild, Frankenstein, Alice in Wonderland. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs attend our summer ESL program offered at our school or are encouraged to attend a nearby school that is offering an ESL program for Newcomers, or any community-based programs available in their residential areas for participation during the summer months. In addition, these students are given a list of websites that they can access at home or at public libraries to help them develop their listening and speaking skills during the summer months. Newly admitted ELLs are also enrolled in Summer school activities such as reading clubs and Summer camp activities organized by non-profit groups so they have an opportunity to practice listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language elective is offered at P.S. /M.S. 181. Spanish is the only language other than English that is taught by a certified bilingual teacher to some assigned classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school only offers a Free Standing ESL program. No Dual Language program is offered at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. ESL pedagogues at our school attend professional development workshops and training during the year. These specifically address the needs of of our ELLs, and provide support for them as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL teachers continuously register for these workshops as they become available throughout the year. Some of these series of workshops is: Reading and Writing Nonfiction for ELLs Institute: Scaffold for Success. Open to: Educators, K through 5th 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  grade* As in the past years, all our ELL teachers will continue to attend ELAND, and NYSESLAT, OR NYCDOE training. Representatives from the Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network (RBERNs) will be also requested to present some professional development workshops on ESL strategies in the Classroom . According to mandates, all new staff receive 7 1/2 hours of ESL training in ESL methodologies and strategies from our ESL teachers every year. Mainstream staff training includes: Providing academic Intervention services to all students who are not meeting standards, including Special Ed. English Language Learners. These workshops/training include: How to align and develop instruction for ELLs which meet the Common Core Learning standards needs; have high expectations for all students including ELLs, scaffolding instruction, importance of teaching academic language, expecting/demanding rigorous ELL student participation by pairing students with NL peers, using debates to develop listening, speaking, reading, writing skills, creating manipulatives, visuals, hands on activities, scaffolding, activating schema, the use of realia, technology (computer data bases, on line tutorials, power point presentations), differentiating instruction for ELLs and Special Education. The following is the schedule planned for professional Development: January 19, 2018 Using the PLUSS Model for Interventions. Differentiating instruction for ELLs and SWD. Supplemental Informational Texts • Creating manipulatives, visuals, hands on activities, scaffolding, the importance of activating schema, the use of realia, • The importance of implementing technology (computer data bases, on line tutorials, power point presentations) in student learning. February 15, 2018 • Specifically teaching academic language through accountable talk, pair share, games, anchor charts and thinking maps/graphic organizers. • Awareness of the different stages of language acquisition in ELLs and Special Ed. ELLs, such as the levels of BICS and CALP. The use of TPR at the beginning stages of language acquisition. • Preparing lessons which meet their Beginning, Intermediate and Advanced language levels, and needs as they acquire academic language. Receptive and productive language student performance descriptors. March 21, 2018 • Providing ELLs with support such as: collaborative groups, peer teaching, project based learning and technology, continued implementation of Literacy strategies such (phonemic awareness taught through content, test preparation strategies) April 12, 2018 • Looking at data to drive instruction and to prepare lessons (differentiated instruction), Monitoring student progress in order to provides academic guidance and support to students in need, the use of ESL methodology in content area classes. SOME OTHER WORKSHOPS WILL BE ABOUT: Understanding the Challenges of the Common Core for the Beginning English Learner (Early Elementary, Grades Pre-K-2) Finding Common Ground for Beginning Level ELLs in the Common Core State Standards (Upper Elementary, Grades 3-5) Realizing Common Core State Standards for Beginning English Learners (Middle School) Creating Access: Common Core State Standards for Beginning English Language Learners (High *An Intro to Second Language Acquisition *Speaking and Listening Practice in the ESL Classroom *Multilanguage /Multilevel ESL classes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  * Literacy and Working with Low-Schooled Students in the ESL Classroom – Part I *Teaching Pronunciation I *Assessment and Evaluation in the ESL classroom *Beyond the Textbook: Pictures and Other Visual Materials for Developing *Conversation Skills *Grammar and Vocabulary in the ESL Classroom *Teaching Pronunciation II *Literacy and Working with Low-Schooled Students – Part II 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We tend to support them by providing the LEPs with appropriate support and by demonstrating in their classrooms a series of strategies that have been proven very successful in helping the ESL population attain success. We assist the teachers by 1) providing the LEPs with the mandated time of instructions required to help them succeed linguistically and academically 2) using cooperative learning activities to help students use and practice their English skills 3) differentiating instructions 4) continuously using ESL approaches such as the Total Practical Response (TPR), the Language Experience Approach (LEA), the Natural Approach etc. 5 showing the staff how to increase the listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills of the ELLs (using technology( radio, computer), pictures, Tactile objects, the Reading Rods machine) 6) Using other resources such as educational CDs ( Reader Rabbit, word families, G2 Narrative), www.starfall.com, www.yourchildlearns.com etc. the leadership committee, testing coordinator, assistant principals, and ESL pedagogues. Our instructional staff and the leadership committee ensures that students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes in ESL as per Commissioner's Regulations 154. - Our mainstream teachers receive monthly professional development from licensed ESL teachers in our school, and from professional staff at the region. These are offered during common preps and or lunch and learn. Mainstream staff training provide academic Intervention strategies and services to all ELLs who are not meeting standards, including Special Ed. English Language Learners. These workshops/training include: • Using the PLUSS Model for Interventions. Differentiating instruction for ELLs and SWDs. Supplemental Informational Texts • Creating manipulatives, visuals, hands on activities, scaffolding, the importance of activating schema, the use of realia, • The importance of implementing technology (computer data bases, on line tutorials, power point presentations) in student learning. • Specifically teaching academic language through accountable talk, pair share, games, anchor charts and thinking maps/graphic organizers. Moreover, teachers of grades 6th to 8th receive support from ESL teachers with students who are at the beginning or EN or EM levels and intermediate levels, Title III after school programs, Saturday math academies and sports clubs. Teachers are free to use and inquire on materials which support students' native language and English language growth such as bilingual dictionaries, web on-line dictionaries, and how to make the best of peer NL support. Also, the ESL teachers are involved in choosing High Schools, which offer service for ELLs, and help out with High School Applications and interpretation to parents and students. Required to attend the workshops are the ELA teachers, The Math, The Social Studies, The ESL teachers, the common branch teachers, the Special Education teachers, the Assistant principals. We, in fact provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. As indicated by the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  required professional development hours for our teachers was based on language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For our English as a New Language teachers, we spend a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours on language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Records of Professional Development are evidenced by agendas and attendance sheets provided to each participant at the beginning of workshops. Copies of those records are kept by the ESL teachers in closed folder in their respective cabinets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? There will be ample of opportunities to have face-to-face meetings with parents during the school year. Parents will meet with teachers during ESL orientations when they have a chance to watch a video and hear information in their native languages on different types of ESL programs available in the the NYC schools and to make a selection of the ESL program of their choice. Parents will also be encouraged to regularly attend parent-teacher conferences and family nights which allow teachers and parents to familiarize themselves each other. In addition, in order to keep close and direct physical contacts with the parents, we will invite them to attend workshops on social, educational, health, and community issues so they can become more aware of some of these current issues. We will also put time aside to call parents of the ELLs to discuss their students' linguistic progress and our expectations relative to their continuous dedication to their own academic achievement. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1. P.S. 181 strongly believes that parent involvement in their child’s education brings the school and family closer, consequently improving parent participation in their child’s studies and a higher performance in student’s work. First, at the beginning of the year, parents are invited to attend ELL Parent Orientation meetings that inform them on the programs available for their child to improve language acquisition, content vocabulary and concepts, and improve their grades a whole. Parents are informed of the various programs available for their children at our school and other schools closed to their home. In addition, they become familiar with programs within the school pertinent to their children’s success in this academic year. 2. We plan to invite parents of ELLs to come into the school to read with their children. Before each reading session, parents will be introduced to reading skills they will be using with their children afterwards. Parents practice the strategy in school on that day and are expected to continue the practice at home. During the sessions, parents and children will successively read to each other. 3. In addition, parents will have an opportunity to view their child’s previous year’s test scores, and interpret them. They are informed of how they can help their child at home, and receive help within the school and out of the school to improve weak areas. Oral translators participate at each meeting to translate to parents who do not understand English. Classroom teachers periodicallly hold Saturday Math, Reading, and writing workshops for parents to enable them to help their children at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  At PS 181, our ESL program not only tends to develop the academic language of the ELLs, but also enhance their skills in the content area and prepare students for the State Standardized tests. Students will work collaboratively to develop the academic language necessary to become proficient in English as well in the core curriculum subject areas. To help the students perform better, we will differentiate instructions using scaffolding methodologies depending on students’ needs, hands-on activities, research-based strategies, technology, and the Internet. Manipulative, accountable talk, and bilingual dictionaries will be part of each lesson and activity in the classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Victor Esannason, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The John Steptoe School School DBN: 17K181 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. V. Essanasson Title Principal Ms. Kathleen Glover Assistant Principal Mr. Keith Grady Parent Coordinator Mr. Willy Delmas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Kerline Altenord Parent Ms. Valmond Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Conolly Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Laguerre School Counselor Mr. Ellis Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Iroku Other Counselor Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17 School Name: The John Steptoe Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Willy Delmas ELL Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Initially, the school conducts an oral interview with the parents at registration with either the parent coordinator or the ESL teachers to identify their language preferences. In addition to this interview, we use computerized data which inform us of parent or guardian’s language preference at school meetings, school notices, bulletins, and other documents sent home. • HLIS (Home Language Survey) • The RHLA report 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  • PTA meetings • Parent Teacher Conferences • Phone communications between parent and teacher 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Oral communications with parents allow us to know of parents’ written and oral language preferences. The preferred languages of the parents/guardians are discovered during the registration process when they are interviewed by either the two Certified ENL teachers in our school, or other trained pedagogues who speak the same language as they do. Interviewing the parent and child, looking at the HLIS form, and doing an informal assessment indicate what language the child speaks, understands, reads, and writes. Here is a list of the languages preferred by the parents: Haitian Creole- Spanish Arabic French Bengali Fulani 90% of parents who speak a language other than English want documents that are sent to them by the school to be translated in their native languages. Based on questionnaires retrieved from the HLIS and constant requests for oral translation, we clearly discover that the majority of bilingual parents prefer that someone communicates with them in their native languages of Haitian Creole, Spanish, French, Arabic, Bengali, and Fulani. In short, parents who speak the indicated languages usually choose their native languages as the primary medium for written and oral communication. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Haitian Creole-30% Spanish Arabic French Bengali Fulani Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Newsletters Parent Notices Permission Letters Distributed to Families Every first Monday of each month plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school usually distributes to the families a number of documents that require translation. Among the documents usually translated are newsletters, calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, New York 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  October 2, 2017 November 01, 2017 December 4, 2017 September 11, 2017 March 08, 2018 May 18, 2018 October 24, 2017 Testing dates, and letters from the school leadership. In fact, the documents to be translated are given to staff members that are fluent in the parents' home languages to be translated and disseminated prior to scheduled time of particular events. During the school year 2017-2019, the communication calendars will appear as follows: * Translated version of newsletters are sent home every Monday to parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  April 05, 2018 April 25 and April and April 30, 2018 * Announcements of parent-teacher conferences are sent in all predominant second languages days before each conference * After school program information are translated in other languages and sent home days before the opening of the program * Each parent receives in his/her native language information pertinent to New York testing dates on days before and right before the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  testing takes place. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent-teacher Conferences Progress Meetings with ELL: September 13, 2017 November 14, 2017 March1 14, 2018 March 28, 2018-- 9:00 AM-12:00 PM June 13 , 2018- 9:00 AM-12:00 PM plan to provide interpretation service(s)? There will be ample of opportunities to have face-to-face meetings with parents during the school year. Parents will meet with teachers during ESL orientations when they have a chance to watch a video and hear information in their native languages on different types of ESL programs available in the the NYC schools and to make a selection of the ESL program of their choice. Parents will also be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  encouraged to regularly attend parent-teacher conferences and family nights which allow teachers and parents to familiarize themselves with each other. In addition, in order to keep close and direct physical contacts with the parents, we will invite them to attend workshops on social, educational, health, and community issues so they can become more aware of some of these current issues. We will also put time aside to call parents of the English Language Learners to discuss their students' linguistic progress and our expectations relative to their continuous dedication to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  their own academic achievement. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Since our school is in fact responsible for providing bilingual parents with language assistance services and making them aware of their right, we will give them a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Will also be posted at the school to the Parents' Guide to Language Access, the Language ID Guide (at the security desk and the main office). As required by the Chancellor's Regulations A-663, we will post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign translated into in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, which specify the availability of interpretation services. Translated signs will be provided to parents of the children whose primary language is neither English nor a covered language. Note that all the forms will be provided in accordance with this section. E. Will be provided a cover letter or notice on the face of the English document in the appropriate covered language indicating how a parent can request free translation or interpretation of such document, as stipulated in Chancellor’s Regulations A-663. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  To gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services, parents will be given a survey that they be encouraged to take. The survey, which will be offered to parents twice a year, will question them on whether they use the services, find the services satisfying, and to provide any suggestions toward the improvement of the services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85 
