2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K185 School Name: P.S. 185 WALTER KASSENBROCK Principal: RENA GOUDELIAS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 185 Walter Kassenbrock 20K185 School Number (DBN): 332000010185 K-5 8601 Ridge Blvd Brooklyn, NY 11209 718-745-6610 Phone Number: 718-836-9631 Fax: Dawn Kourtessis dkourtessis@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Rena Goudelias Jane Paul Maya Elfont and Lara Bianchi-Weiner Adele Doyle N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415 89 St. Brooklyn, NY 11209 KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4908 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Cheryl Watson-Harris Executive Director: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 cherylwatson@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-923-5171 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rena Goudelias Jane Paul Maia Elfont Patricia Massa N/A N/A N/A MenexeTsividakis Jade Grimaldi *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Special Ed Lower Grades Member/Regular Ed Upper Grades Member/Special Ed Lower Grades 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Thomas Brown Adele Doyle JaquelineTepedino Nicole Kabel Michael Sibley Lara Bianchi-Weiner Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ ENL Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School’s Mission Statement: P.S. 185 will provide a quality education for all of our students by implementing standards-based instruction, maximizing potential and providing a nurturing and supportive environment. We will encourage independent learning, critical thinking, the development of civil and social skills and the recognition and acceptance of cultural 2018-19 CEP 9  differences. By involving parents and collaborating with the community, we will strive to create students who are lifelong learners and productive members of society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.185 Walter Kassenbrock is an elementary school in the heart of Bay Ridge Brooklyn serving students in grades K-5. Our current overall register is 670 with 5 Kindergarten, 4 first, 4 second, 4 third, 4 fourth and 3 fifth grade classes. We have two 12:1 class serving students in grades K-2 and 3-5. We have one ICT class in each grade, except fourth. We have two ICT classes in fourth grade. Kindergarten class registers are at 25 and all other classes are close to maximum levels. The school population comprises 16% Hispanic, 1% black, 8% Asian, and 71% White. We have a total of 51 students who are English Language Learners representing 7% of the student population. Students with IEPs representing about 13% of the total school population. These students receive services that include speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy, guidance and resource room (SETSS). Services are provided to address the specific needs of our students in one- to- one and small group settings, and vary in frequency such as once, twice or even three times a week. Certain students are positioned in an ICT class, where they receive targeted instruction from a generalist and specialist. Our 12:1 classes serve students who need the greatest amount of support. The average attendance rate for all students is 95.8% PS 185 is proud to have the following partnerships: NIA, Parent Volunteers, Salvation Army, Science to Shore, Halloween Window Painting Contest, Franklin Furnace Partnership, Ragamuffin Parade, Toys for Tots, The Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum, Shadowbox Puppets, Relay for Life, Jump Rope for Heart, Track Team and New York Road Runners Club. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In ELA, the number of students performing at levels 3 and 4 are greater than both city and district averages, and the average proficiency rating for ELA in all grades is greater than the city average. In math, the number of students performing at levels 3 and 4 are greater than both the city and district averages, and the average proficiency rating for math in all grades is greater than city averages. Additionally, our graduates’ core course pass rate in middle school is greater than both our peer group and city averages. Our ENL students are having difficulty responding to questions in a written manner, and therefore are not making progress on the NYSESLAT and state ELA and math exams. ELLs will be provided with additional activity specific scaffolds to facilitate their progress in writing. Parents of ELLs will be able to use the provided scaffolds to increase writing proficiency. Our special education students are making progress in both ELA and Math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 10  Although our students performed better than city and district averages, there is always room for improvement. In ELA, there are still 37% of our students not meeting standards. In math, there are 35% of our students not meeting standards. Additionally, we want to strive to develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging and meeting the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide areas of strength for PS 185 are Collaborative Teachers and Supportive Environment. Areas we would like to focus on this year are Effective School Leadership and Strong Family and Community Ties. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K185 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 652 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 10 29 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 20 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 40.0% % Attendance Rate 36.7% % Reduced Lunch 7.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 17.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 70.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 69.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 68 95.2% 3.2% 14.3% 1.2% 7.8% 3.4% 2 0% 7 67.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide indicated that in ELA the school's lowest performing students improved on their state ELA scores, all students however still have room for improvement. In math, all students, including the lowest performing students, have room for improvement. Even though the number of students performing at levels 3 and 4 are greater than both city and district averages, and the average proficiency rating in all grades is greater than the city average, there are still 37% of our students not meeting standards in ELA. Ten of our ENL students have remained at the same level on the NYSESLAT from last year. Our ENL students have also not made progress on the state ELA and math exams. Our goal is to continue to provide rigorous instruction that challenges all students, including students with IEP's and ENL's at their instructional level and monitors progress to adjust instruction based on classroom data. We will continue to translate and disseminate all written communication sent home ot facilitate increased participation with parents of ELLs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will design and implement standards aligned, project based learning opportunities, and small group instruction with scaffolds and supports for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners, and advanced students as measured by 75% of teachers receiving an overall Advance rating of effective or highly effective in designing coherent instruction (1e) and engaging students in learning (3c). 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, students Sept-June Teachers, Administrators Our Instructional Focus is to have all students show measurable growth in their ability to: ELA: -determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, distinguishing literal from non-literal language -Wordly Wise will be used 3-5 and students will identify new vocabulary while working in their core subjects Math: -recognizing area as additive-decomposing rectangular figures into non-overlapping rectangles and adding the areas Students in grades K-5 Students in grades K-5 -adding and subtracting mixed numbers with like denominators in isolation as well as in word problems Students in grades K-5 Classroom teachers, administrators 2018-19 CEP 14  Teachers will administer baseline assessments in September/October in order to identify student strengths and areas of need in Reading, Writing and Math. Teachers will work in grade level teams to analyze data and plan instruction utilizing the workshop model present within the Teachers College Reading and Writing, Speaking and Listening Units and the GO Math curriculum. Students will receive academic support and progress monitoring throughout the year based on Fountas and Pinnell running records and BOY, MOY, and EOY Go Math assesements. Fundations will be used in early childhood literacy instruction. Student reading logs will be used as a resource to capture students’ reading habits and responses to texts read both inside and outside of the classroom. Writing rubrics and exemplar writing samples will be provided to students for every writing assignment, so students are clear about the characteristics of quality writing and have models for support. Teachers will engage all students, including ENL's, SWD's, AIS students, as well as advanced learners by providing academic support through small group instruction and project based learning opportunities. ENL teacher will work with the classroom teacher to ensure that daily plans align and meet the needs of the ENL students. ENL instruction will be a combination of push-in and pull-out instruction using the National Geographic Reach Program Classroom teachers, clusters, service providers, administration Classroom teachers, administration Sept/Oct. Sept.-June Students in grades K-5 Students in grades K-5 Sept- June Classroom teachers, administration Students in grades K-5 Sept-June Classroom teachers, administration ENL Teacher and Classroom Teachers Sept-June Classroom Teachers, Adminstration Administration 2018-19 CEP 15  ENL plans will be collected and reviewed weekly and student progress will be monitored closely. Admin will complete observation cycles with a focus on designing coherent instruction (1e) and engaging students in learning (3c). Teachers will be assessed in each area during all observations. Weekly grade meetings with administration will be used to share best practices around 1e and 3c. Continue Small Steps to Success to address needs of ENLs Sept-June Sept-June Jan. 2017 – April 2017 Classroom Teachers, ENL Teacher K-5 ENLs and at-risk students Continue intervention for students with disabilities through the use of SETSS, RTI, and AIS to address their specific needs. Classroom Paraprofessionals and volunteers will assist classroom teachers in ELA and Math instruction on various grade levels. Conduct Parent Workshops to inform parents of school initiatives and curriculum. K-5 IEP students Oct. 2016-June 2017 Special Education Teachers Various grades Parents, Teachers Parents, Students in K-5 Sept-June Parent Coordinator Oct.-June School Staff, Parent Coordinator, Administration Teachers, administration Nov-June 2018-19 CEP 16  Inform parents of F&P Levels on student report cards in grades K-5. Inform parents of overall percentage grades in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies on report cards in grades 3-5. Conduct informal parent gatherings to address academic needs of children. Utilize Tuesday Parent Conference time to discuss individual progress and concern. Utilize paraprofessionals and volunteers to address needs of at-risk students. Teachers, administration Parent Coordinator, Teachers Teachers, administration Parents, Teachers, Students in grades 3-5 Oct.-June Parents, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Students in grades K-5 Oct-June Utilize Technology Programs to enhance home/school connections and parental understanding of academic challenges: Oct-June Sept - June Teachers, Parent Coordinator -Think Central -Learning A-Z, Razz Kids -Scholastic Book Wizard/Book Source for at home book selection and leveling School Staff and Parents Oct-June Classroom Teachers and Administration 2018-19 CEP 17  Drive small group instruction and project based learning from classroom observations, pre and post assessments, as well as state exam data. Teachers and students in grades K-5 Promotion in Doubt students will receive AIS services Xavier, Xaverian, and Fontbone Hall Academy High School Community Service students and additional volunteers will work with students in need of extra help. Students in grades 3-5 Students grades K-5 Students in grades K-5 Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project and Go Math anchor charts as well as additional individual based scaffolds and supports developed from inquiry team findings will be utilized in classroom instruction. Students in grades 1 Oct-June Feb- May Sept-June AIS Teachers and Administration Volunteers, classroom teachers and administration Classroom teachers, and administration Paraprofessionals, classroom teachers, and administration Reading Rescue program will be implemented for students in grade 1 struggling with reading. Teachers K-5 Teachers K-5 Oct-June 2018-19 CEP 18  TC Staff Developers, professional development calendar days and other outside PD opportunities will be provided for teachers and . Administration Teachers will turn-key professional development attended at monthly meetings. Sept-June Administration and Teachers Monthly Sept-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September Curriculum Meeting with Teachers Classroom Visitations for Parents throughout the year Instructional Information at PTA monthly Meetings given by various staff members Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. IEP teacher will be utilized to provide small group instruction to our SETTS and at-risk students. Paraprofessionals will be trained in Reading Rescue, Fountas and Pinnell and Great Leaps programs National Geographic REACH program for ENL students Fountas and Pinnell Kits, Leveled Libraries Teachers College Staff Developers 2018-19 CEP 19  Funding for Substitutes for Teachers College PD Teachers College Units for Reading and Writing Various Professional Development Programs for Teachers In house Professional Development - turn-key by staff (Per Session and Substitute Funding Needed) NYSTL funds will be used to purchase Fundations and Core Curriculum materials. Title III will be used to support 7% of these purchases. Parent grant from PTA will support purchase of classroom libraries and Teachers College materials/resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In early January 2019 the P.S.185 Student Progress Report will be distributed to parents of all grades. SWDs’ and ENLS’ performance will be desegregated to monitor student growth. By February 26, 2019 all classrooms will be participating in small group instruction at least twice a week as evidenced by classroom observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) F&P Levels from Fall, Winter, Spring BOY, MOY, EOY Go Math Assessments Advance Ratings from Classroom Observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 98% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards. However the following areas should increase to as close to 100% as possible: -Following rules in class -paying attention when they are supposed to -behaving well even when the teacher is not watching -listening carefully when the teacher gives directions Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the areas that are less than 90% on the School Quality Guide mentioned in the Needs Assessment will increase by at least 3%. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff Oct-June Staff In the 2018-2019 school year the staff will participate in meetings with the school mental health consultant. Teachers will continue to use the Sanford Harmony program. They will conduct at least two Sanford Harmony lessons each week. Professional Development will be provided for Sanford Harmony and other social emotional supports Students in grades K-5 Students will participate in an anti-bullying assembly and in class anti-bullying workshops Rising Stars will be presented monthly to one child per class Strategies such as role playing, meditation, and interactive games will be used by the classroom teachers and the guidance counselor. Posters will be created by students and displayed throughout the hallways. 2018-19 CEP 22 Oct-May Students in K-5 Parent Coordinator, Administration Sept-June Teachers, Guidance Counselor Teachers, Guidance Counselor Oct-May Teachers and Guidance Counselor Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Oct-June Teachers and Guidance Counselor Students in grades K-5 Oct-June Students in grades K-5 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration  Parent Handbook will be updated with clear rules and expectations for social interaction. Parents in K-5 Oct-May Parents in K-5 Monthly meetings will be held with ENL teachers and ICT teachers to assess social emotional needs of their students. Teachers Sept. – June ICT Teachers, ENL Teacher, , Administration School Counselor will help teachers to implement the Sanford Harmony Social Emotional program to help students learn about diversity and work productively with all students. School Counselor, Teachers, Students Sept-June Administration, School Counselor School Counselor will lead the NYC DOE Comfort Dog Program Student Government will implement strategies learned through the Sanford Harmony program to help students in need. Peer Mediation will be facilitated by Student Government and class reps during lunch and recess. Weekly Principal Meetings with the students to address school issues and events Student Council, Teachers, Students Students Nov. -June Parent Coordinator, Administration Principal , Teachers and Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be held by Teachers, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor: September Curriculum Night, January Growth Mindset Workshop, Spring Testing Workshop, Fall ENL Workshop, Fall and Spring Middle School Workshops. A new parent and student friendly website with individual classroom web pages will be utilized. Class web 2018-19 CEP 23  pages will include a list of educational websites and apps that students can use at home. Think Central will be utilized for at home access to Go Math and Amplify Science resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony materials, resources and training. School Counselor full-time salary Tax levy funds will be used to purchase materials such as paper, ink, and maintenance costs of school copier. Partial Title III funding will be used for curriculum materials and resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019: All teachers will be utilizing the Sanford Harmony Program twice a week as evidenced by teacher observations. There will be an increase in the number of Parent Workshops in which social emotional needs are addressed. The school councilor will meet with 50% of classrooms to address social and emotional needs. Likert Scale Survey will be administered to students to determine baseline levels of anxiety during specific school and classroom activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Likert Scale Survey administered to students. -In January students will take the survey again and results will be compared to measure changes in anxiety levels 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on MOTP observations from 2017-2018 teachers are participating in common planning . Teachers work with a staff developer from Teachers College and attend both ELA and Math professional development. Teachers have begun to work on inquiry teams in which they analyze student work and drive instruction based on observations and assessment results. Based on our June Instructional report it is evident that students at our school are performing lower at determining the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, distinguishing literal from non-literal language. Informal observations from teacher observations show that vocabulary is being taught in isolation and students are unable to use new vocabulary in reading and writing. Informal observations in K-2 show that there is little to no explicit grammar instruction occurring. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate as part of a data inquiry team in order to analyze student work products, discern student strengths and weaknesses, research potential strategies and tailor instruction for all students; including students with disabilities, English language learners and advanced students measured by an increase of 3% in ELA and Math scores and a proficient or well-developed rating in the area of Pedagogy on the Principal Practice Observations. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be provided with time and resources to support collaboration on teams. These teams will analyze student work and research strategies to improve instruction for all students. Teacher Monthly team members 3 – 4 times per year Teachers will be provided planning time in order to allow teachers to provide focused, targeted instruction. Sept -June Teachers Administration, Teacher Team Members Administration Administration ENL teacher will be provided time to meet with each grade to discuss needs of students and provide strategies that classroom teacher can use to support ENL students’ access to learning goals. ENL Teacher. Classroom Teachers and Parents Teachers Monthly ENL Teacher 2018-19 CEP 27  Teachers will meet monthly to review and discuss student work samples of designated IEP/ENL/advanced students. Teachers will collaborate to establish best practices for working with sub-groups of students and schedule parent meetings based on the findings. Teachers will work collaboratively with service providers to plan for needs based grouping. Teacher teams will record inquiry meeting data and minutes in Google drive to be shared with colleagues and administration. Inquiry teams will use the District 20 research drive and Goalbook to identify researched based strategies to improve student learning In grade K-2, Inquiry teams will analyze the effects of explicit grammar instruction. In grades 3-5 Inquiry teams will analyze the effects of word study work in their student work. Admin will attend one inquiry meeting a month to monitor students progress and new strategies being used. IEP students, parents Teachers, Service Providers Teachers Teachers Teachers, Weekly Classroom teachers, administration, parents Administration Sept-June Administration Oct. -June Oct-June Administration Oct-June Administration Teachers Oct-June Teachers and Students Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September Curriculum Night- Writing Rubrics, and BOY, MOY, EOY Go Math Skills will be distributed to parents 2018-19 CEP 28  November Parent Teacher Conferences- F&P levels will be distributed and discussed with parents, as well as BOY Math assessment results, and on demand writing pieces January Progress Reports/ Parent Meetings - F&P, Writing and Math Progress will be discussed, as well as additional parent concerns March Parent Teacher Conferences- F&P, and Writing Progress will be discussed. Math progress will be discussed using the MOY GO Math item analysis. Ongoing - Instructional meetings with teachers, additional open school invitations to parents, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development time, portfolios, assessment data sheets Tax Levy funds will be used to support substitute days for coverages and additional PD. Purchase of portfolios and related materials, and related copy costs. Title III funds will support 7% of these costs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Administration will review the following: Google Drive documents Use of scaffolds and supports during classroom visits ENL student work Assessment data sheets Logs of the inter-visitations for the year Log of classroom teacher discussions with ELL teacher End of cycle inquiry data sheets, and pre and post assessments 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Observations Assessment Data Sheets Inquiry Data Sheets BOY, MOY, EOY Go Math Assessments F&P Progress (Published Assessments in STARS Classroom) Pre and Post On Demand Writing Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Observation and the 2015-2016 Quality Review our well developed areas include school culture and systems for improvement. Based on MOTP data and teachers self selected professional goals teachers receive ongoing professional development from school based staff including administration and teacher leaders. These professional development opportunities are meant to address the needs of all students including ENL's and students with disabilities. An area of focus for PS 185 is component 1.2, which focuses on pedagogy. This data makes it evident that teachers need to plan instruction that is engaging and meets the needs of all learners so that they can produce meaningful work products. In ELA our instructional report shows that our students percentage point changes are similar to those of other students in NYC. In math our instructional report shows that our students percentage changes in some areas are lower than those in the city. These areas include fractions, and numbers and operations. Our students with disabilities and English language learners are not making as much progress as our general education students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers and staff will continue to build coherent instructional and social-emotional supports to improve student achievement for all students, including English language learners, students with disabilities and advanced students measured by at least a 3% increase in state exam ELA and math scores. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher teams will be created to collaborate with administration in order to pace planning needs of the grade and create a PD plan that meets the needs of the teaching staff. Teams will also make decisions regarding academic resources and programs adopted/adapted by the school. Teachers and service providers will work on inquiry teams to analyze student work and build scaffolds and supports based on student needs. Teacher Teams Regularly as set by the team Administration and teacher teams Monthly ENL teacher will support classroom instruction through common planning. Teacher Teams Monthly meetings will be held with all staff involved in working with students with Behavior Intervention Plans (BIP) to discuss progress and analyze student work. Progress monitoring will take place and BIP's will be updated. Administration and teacher teams Administration ENL teacher Monthly Teachers, Paras, Service Providers A School Implementation Team will be created and supported to address response to intervention Tiers I, II, and III by administration. Implementation Team Regularly as set by the team Administration and IEP teacher Administration will meet with grade level teams bi-monthly to assess team functioning and common planning. Teachers Bi-Monthly Administration Monthly Administration Teachers Quarterly Administration 2018-19 CEP 32  Administrators will conduct observation cycles with a focus on scaffolds and supports used to engage students. Through the use of circular 6, staff members will take on leadership roles to build capacity for students with disabilities, English language learners, and advanced students. -Speech Pathologist will develop mindfulness supports -Teachers will develop a plan for school-wide read alouds -Teachers will develop and run a Technology Team -Special Education Teachers and Service Providers will collaborate through IEP and BIP (Behavior Improvement Team) teams. -Gifted Groups will be provided by cluster teachers Teachers On going Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly School Leadership Meetings (SLT) Monthly PTA Meetings Informational Testing Meeting ENL Parent Meetings 2018-19 CEP 33  Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement Time Parent Coordinator Informational Meetings Weekly Updates sent through School Messenger Letters/Emails to Parents Monthly Family Fun Night Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional materials, per session funding as required by team members. Funds to purchase necessary materials, funds for per session Tax Levy funds will be used by team members to purchase all instructional materials. Title III funds will be used to purchase 7% of the materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019- Teachers will analyze progress towards meeting F&P Benchmarks for the grade level. Teachers will analyze BOY Go Math Assessment and plan instruction based on results. Updates will be given to administration about progress towards Circular 6 activity. BIP's will be analyzed and updated based on student needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fall, Winter, Spring F&P BOY, MOY, EOY Go Math Assessments 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S.185 seeks to create an inclusive and enriching environment which values diversity, creativity and community. Toward that end, we will seek to identify ways not only to engage parents within our school but also to help parents and our school community to feel empowered to foster a rich educational experience for all children in our school. . Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide 93% of parents feel that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, and 92% feel well informed by the communication they receive from the school. However, PTA data shows that less than 5% of the parents attend monthly PTA meetings. ATS data shows that PS 185's average daily attendance for students is 95%. However, approximately 35 students are absent each day and about 14% (95 students) are late more than ten times throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an improvement in the school climate as evidenced by an increase of 10% in parent attendance at PTA meetings, and more positive school communication between school and home. This will also result in a 2% increase in student attendance and a 2% decrease in student lateness. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The PTA will more effectively encourage parent and teacher co-created community events, including our PS 185 Gala and the Fall Harvest Festival. Parents, Teacher Teams Sept-June Administration, Parent Involvement Team Sept.-June Advertise our school's spirit and community by showcasing on our website Monthly "Here's What's Hot This Month at PS 185!" the school and community will be encouraged to check out what great things our students do. Parents and families Parents Teachers, Parents Implement Parent Involvement Team to serve as liaisons who will facilitate all planning related to organizing and scheduling parent meetings and classroom visitations. Establish "Coffee with the Special Education Team" as well as Ell and other undeserved populations to express concerns and receive information. Create and Maintain a Questions for the Principal suggestion box, wherein parents, teachers and students are encouraged to leave their questions. Administration will address the topics at monthly PTA meetings. Administration Fall, Spring Fall, Spring Administration Administration Invite parents to the classrooms. Translate newsletters and invitations for ENL families. ENL families Sept – June Parent coordinator Provide class and grade level workshops for parents to learn their child’s curriculum in order to better support them at home. Teachers and Parents Quarterly Classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP 37  Bolster PTA attendance by highlighting student talent and achievement. Teachers and parents Monthly meetings Teachers, Teachers will select a "Rising Star" each month. Awards will be distributed at PTA meetings. Provide workshops for parents to enhance school-home connection at PTA meetings. Art Show at Spring PTA meetings Musical Performances at Winter PTA meetings Book of the Month will be viewed and discussed at PTA meetings. Late passes will be given when students enter the building after 8am. Letters will be sent to parents regarding excessive absence and lateness. Students in K-5 Continue foster family oriented events such as (Family Game Night, Indoor and Outdoor Movie Night, Sock Hop) Students in K-5 Parent Involvement Team, PTA, Administration Administration Daily Administration Quarterly 2018-19 CEP 38  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Guest Speakers at PTA meetings or on Tuesday Parent Involvement Days Schoolwide Chess Program/Tournaments NIA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional preps, per session time, materials and resources (awards, copying costs) Tax Levy funds will be used to support substitutes, per session, and parent involvement costs. Copies of newsletters, invitations, and related copy costs. Title III funds will support 7% of these costs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019: -Student attendance will increase by 2% -Student lateness will decrease by 2% -Parent attendance at PTA meetings will increase by 10%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student attendance and lateness rates PTA meeting attendance rates Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State ELA Test Mathematics State Math Test Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Classroom Assessments, Informal Teacher Observations Classroom Assessments, Informal Teacher Observations Classroom Assessments, State Tests, classroom anecdotals Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Classroom, small group, one-to-one During the school day, and after school program Classroom, small group, one-to-one During the school day, and after school program Classroom, small group, one-to-one During the school day Classroom, small group, one-to-one During the school day Classroom, small group, one-to-one During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Teachers College, Workshop Model, Pre-Reading, highlighting. graphic organizers, repeated readings, shorter passages, Learning Leaders,Small Steps, RTITier 1, 2, 3 Go Math Core Curriculum, simpler problems, varied response types, use of manipulatives, graph paper, fewer problems, Learning Leaders, Small Steps, RTITier 1,2,3 Pre-reading, highlighting, visual representations, Learning Leaders Pre-reading, highlighting, visual representations, Learning Leaders RTI Tier 1, 2, 3 intervention strategies, role playing, discussion, brainstorming problem solving strategies 2018-19 CEP 40  2018-19 CEP 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 student 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 42  - Counseling -Book bags, lunch boxes, and school supplies -School apparel -After School Programs 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $8701 was allocated 2018-19 CEP 43  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 44  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 45  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 185, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 185 will support parents and families of Title I students by the followng although we are not a Title 1 School: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 48  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.185 Walter Kassenbrock , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 49  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 51  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: As evidenced by the Title III AMAO indicator and the scores on the ELA, MOSL tasks and NYSELAT, many of our ELLs and former ELLs in grades 1-5 are performing below grade level in ELA, and as demonstarted by a data analysis of modalities, specifically in the areas of reading and writing. In order to provide additional academic support to these students, administration and pedagogical staff at PS 185 will utilize a large portion of the Title III Supplement Program funds to run an after school supplemental program entitled "Small Steps to Success." Supplemental instruction will be provided through small group lessons every Thursday for a duration of 1 hours each session (2:30-3:30pm) and will serve approximately 50 students in grades 1-5. The program will run for 30 weeks. The program will be held for 2 hours once a week from October through May.English Language Learners will be grouped according to their grade and current NYSELAT or NYSITELL proficiency level. In grades 4-5, former ELLs who scored at a level 1 on their ELA exam will be placed with the beginning and intermediate ELLs. Former ELLs who scored a level 2 or higher will be placed with the advanced ELLs students. Former ELL students in non testing grades who scored low on the MOSL and LEAD 21 literacy assessments, will be placed with beginning and intermediate ELLs, and students who scored at a higher level will be placed with the Advanced ELLs. In assessment and curriculum planning sessions, the ESL teacher will work with the general education teachers to address the differences and similarities between students at each level and how this particular grouping will lead to effective instruction. Together the ESL teacher and the general education teachers will create a curriculum for the entire length of the program as well as assessments to follow up each mini-unit. National Geographic materials and leveled library books will be purchased with Title III funds to be used as curriculum of the program. The program will enlist the services of the ENL teacher, the ENL certified common branch teacher, and an additional 2 common-branch certified teachers. The ENL teachers will co-teach with the general education teachers. During instructional time, the ENL teachers will teach content using ESL best practices and methods. Teaching content will involve pre-teaching key vocabulary, creating visual supplements to each lesson, and facilitating academic discussion among the students and general education teacher. The last few sessions of the program will include review study for the NYSESLAT including story development, critical thinking and descriptive story telling. LAT materials will be purchased with Title III funds.To improve literacy skills, teachers will use mentor texts and books from the Teacher's College leveled library as well as the SRA Reading Kits for independent reading practice. Teachers will integrate oral language development using materials from Mondo, and National Geographic. All instruction will be in English. Teachers will communicate progress to parents in their home language via bilingual staff, and also offer strategies to build native language arts at home, which will improve literacy in general for the student. Attendance will be recorded on a Teacher created attendance sheet. Each student will have an after school folder, and all student work and assessments will be included. A copy of all letters sent home in the parent's preferred language will be retained by the ELL Coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: To determine best strategies and establish a supporting pacing calendar for the Small Steps to Success program, all teachers who service ELLs and those participating in the Small Steps program will participate in a 1 hour professional development session. The PD session will be held on 09/04/18 at 12pm in the school auditorium presented by the ENL teacher and instructional specialist. This PD will be at no cost to the program. Attendance will be taken, and will be kept by the ELL Coordinator in addition to the PD Agenda, and any materials used. The focus of the PD will be on identifying vocabulary building strategies centered around fiction and non-fiction reading material. Using Teacher's College running records and end-of-unit assessments to assess current skills and to provide rigorous content material, this PD session will align the pacing calendar with practical goals and "Small Steps" activities. Starting in early November, teachers of ELLs will attend workshops offered by the the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support on topics ranging from co-teaching, working with newcomers, creating language objectives, to Brain Research on ELLs. Within 2 weeks of each session, the attending teachers will provide professional development for the whole staff during Monday PD time. This will occur 5 times a school year. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 185 will host a multicultural potluck on 5/30/19 in order for parents to get to know each other better and share a bit about their family life, home country, food, etc. This potluck will be held because of the diversity of our ELL population, and for students and parents of all backgrounds to feel comfortable with integrating in the school community. The potluck will take place during parent engagement time and will last approximately one hour. The ENL teacher will host and will be accompanied by the parent coordinator and the Assistant Principal. Additionally, PS 185 will conduct two parent workshops for parents of ELLs on two consecutive Tuesdays in January. Dates for the workshops are 1/7/19 and 1/14/19. Each workshop will last approximately 1 1/2 hours from 4-5:30PM. Before the start of each program, the parent coordinator will ensure that each student receives an invitation in their preferred language of communication as indicated on their registration form. Parents who do not return the form will be contacted by the parent coordinator, utilizing DOE translation services when necessary. The workshops will be for parents of students participating in the Title III program. The workshop will explain the rationale, structure, and goals of the program, leaving ample time for parents to ask 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities questions. Additionally, the workshop will focus on familiarizing parents of ELLs with the Common Core and the online resources that parents can use to assist their children in accessing the Common Core. This workshop is targeted at supporting the higher academic achievement of their children. The workshop will be presented in the library by our instructional specialist and the ENL teacher. PS 185 will have translators on-site for those parents who do not speak English. Letters inviting parents to the workshops will be disseminated the week before the workshop. Refreshments will be served.All attendance and materials will be retained by the ELL Coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $6,013.98  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $6,052.02 N/A N/A $300.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Small Steps to Success: $5727.60 will pay for 2 teachers working 2 hours a week for a total of 30 weeks (30 sessions) at $47.73. Parent Workshops: $286.38 will pay for 2 teachers to work 3 hours at $47.73. Each meeting will last 1 1/2 hours. N/A $4,552.02 will cover the cost of additional literacy materials (National Geographic Ell supplementary materials, Leveled Library books) for the Small Steps to Success program. NYSESLAT test materials cost $1,500.00 N/A N/A $150 for refreshments for parents attending the parent workshops. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $150 for refreshments and food for parents attending the multicultural night. N/A TOTAL $12,366 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Walter Kassenbrock Borough Brooklyn School Number 185 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rena Goudelias Coach Maryann Gureli ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Thomas Brown Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Arico / 3rd Grade Teacher/Subject Area Betty Appelbaum / Kindergarten Related-Service Provider Joan Giammarino / Speech Langu Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Melissa Meahl Coach type here School Counselor Jennifer Lamanna Parent Adele Doyle Parent Coordinator Mary Maguire Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 652 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.82% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers in all grades use the Fountas and Pinnell program to assess phonics and comprehension skills for our ELLs. In grade K, teachers use a concepts of print and sight words assessment to gauge students readiness for the program and place students in guided reading groups in order to better differentiate instruction. As a supplement to Fountas and Pinnell assessments, teachers in grades 1-5 use in the form of a TCRWP on demand pre assessment to assess reading comprehension. From these assessments, it is clear that ELLs need academic intervention in the areas of sight-word recognition, vocabulary development and reading comprehension. ELLs also receive supplemental instruction in word study, connecting new vocabulary to vocabulary already known in their home language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 60  The ELL Coordinator has scaffolds that align with the New York State Bilingual Common Core Progressions. In addition, teachers have created unit plans and curriculum maps. There are weekly scheduled grade meetings for teachers to plan instructional activities and assessments, coordinated across the grade. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At PS 185, we evaluate the success of our program by looking at multiple sources of student data. First, we examine the number of students moving up from one proficiency level to the next. We pair this information with the total number of ELLs testing out of the ELL program (scoring Commanding). For all grades, we look at in-house benchmark exams and compare MOSL performance from the beginning of the year with the end-of-year MOSL. For the upper grades, specifically, we also look at the number of students moving up a level in both ELA and Math as evidenced by their scores on interim assessments and the Statewide tests. For the past few years, we have placed greater emphasis on the progress of ELLs, developing CEP and PPR goals that highlight ELLs as a subgroup in need of targeted academic intervention. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ELL Coordinator has scaffolds that align with the New York State Bilingual Common Core Progressions. In addition, teachers have created unit plans and curriculum maps. There are weekly scheduled grade meetings for teachers to plan instructional activities and assessments, coordinated across the grade. Classroom teachers communicate with the ELL Coordinator and provide student work samples to collaborate over intervention responses. The ELL Coordinator can recommend Tier 1 interventions for the classroom, and if further intervention is needed, an ENL teacher can use higher tier interventions upon escalation. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Before recommending a student for an evaluation, teachers use a multi-tiered intervention system to initially assess and subsequently address an individual students strengths and weaknesses. Teachers start off with a baseline assessment given to all their students. ELLs who score low on this baseline are provided with Tier II instruction in small groups designed to address their academic deficiencies. Students who demonstrate difficulty within these small groups are then administered an additional screener to isolate their strengths and weaknesses. Students who demonstrate the greatest need are provided with Tier III instruction with targeted individual goals, and teachers use one-to-one intervention in the form of conferencing and direct Tier III instruction. Students who do not respond to the one-to-one intervention are then brought up to the School Based Support Team before an evaluation is conducted. This model is used within the ENL groups as well. Materials used for Tier II instruction include our Lead 21 intensive readers for the upper grades and Fundations phonics instruction for students in grades K-2. For Tier I direct instruction, teacher's create individual lessons that address the academic deficiencies in question. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data across performance levels reveals that the overwhelming majority of students in grades 1-5 who took the NYSELAT scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels, with a few students in each grade scoring at the Entering and Emerging levels. For the Kindergarten ELLs , most scored at the Transitioning and Expanding level as well, with higher scores in the listening section and lower scores in the speaking section. The new admits in all other grades scored at the Entering levels. Finally, ELL students with SWDs scored at either the Entering or Emerging levels, with the exception of a few fifth grade students who scored at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. In total, 7 students achieved proficiency this year and scored at the Commanding level. For all other students who did not achieve proficiency, the area of greatest difficulty on the NYSELAT was the writing section. Through small group instruction, classroom teachers, support staff, and the ENL teacher will use this information when it becomes available to develop mini-lessons to address any patterns that we find. Using benchmark tests, interim assessments, and predictives, all teachers will be able to identify specific subskills that students are struggling with in order to tailor instruction to those areas of weakness. Finally, utilizing the AMAO tool will show those students who are most at risk and can be used to strengthen PS 185's multi-tiered RTI initiative for ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 61  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL Coordinator and the data specialist gather all assessment data in the beginning of the school year, analyzing and determines areas of strengths and weakness to be targeted in instruction and disseminated to the classroom teachers. Additionally, the data specialist, programmer, ELL Coordinator, and Special Education Coordinator meet on a weekly basis to ensure all compliance needs are being met, and adjusted. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. For the Freestanding ENL program, integrated and standalone ENL services are provided to students in blocks of either 45 or 90 minutes. These blocks add up to 360 minutes each week for Entering and Emerging students and 180 minutes each week for Transitioning and Expanding students. For those who reached the Commanding level, students receive 90 minutes of Integrated-ENL instruction for two years after reaching proficiency. Students at the Entering level receive a minimum of 180 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Integrated ENL is provided in a separate location by a dually certified teaching holding both an ESL license and Common Branch license, and as a push-in service where the ESL teacher teaches alongside the Common Branch classroom teacher. Emerging students receive 90 minutes of standalone, 90 minutes of integrated, and 180 minutes that can be either of the two delivery models. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated and 90 minutes that can be either model. For Expanding students, 180 minutes must be integrated ENL, and for students who reach the Commanding level, they must receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL for two years after reaching the proficiency. b. In order to meet the state mandate, students in grades 1-2 and 3-4 are grouped together across proficiency levels, while grades K and 5 exist in mixed proficiency groups of their own. Students who receive commanding levels will join grade-appropriate groups of their grade level or grade band for 1/2 unit per week. We feel this model allows our ELL students a supportive, comfortable environment in which the students feel free to take risks and make mistakes. Grouping students across grades also allows for the older students to aid the younger students in their understanding of language objectives. Furthermore, we feel that our ELL students can develop oral language skills using activities such as choral reading, songs and oral recitations without disrupting the students in the regular class. Indeed, the development of oral language is the crucial first step on the continuum of language acquisition and pivotal in developing fluency in literacy. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not currently have a Transitional Bilingual Plan, however if we did students would receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction for Entering and Emerging ELLs, 180 minutes for Transitioning and Exapanding ELLs, and 90 minutes for Former-ELLs witihin 2 years of exiting ELL status. All current ELLs would receive 1 period of home language instruction. Entering and Emerging ELLs would receive 2 periods bilingual content area instruction, and Transitioning and Expanding ELLs would receive 1 period of bilingual content area instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not currently have a Dual Language Program, however if we did students would receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction for Entering and Emerging ELLs, 180 minutes for Transitioning and Exapanding ELLs, and 90 minutes for Former-ELLs witihin 2 years of exiting ELL status. All current ELLs would receive 1 period of home language instruction. Entering and Emerging ELLs would receive 2 periods bilingual content area instruction, and Transitioning and Expanding ELLs would receive 1 period of bilingual content area instruction. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We currently service all our ELLs using the standalone ENL program model. All students receive the prescribed amount of instruction as required by CR Part 154. Emerging and Entering ELL students are seen 8 periods or 360 minutes per week, with time spent out of the classroom in standalone ENL according to the minutes mandated for each student. At PS 185K, Transitioning and Expanding ELL students are seen 4 periods or 180 minutes per week, and are joined by students who have reached the Commanding Level for 90 minutes every week. In order to provide the prescribed minutes mandated by CR Part 154, students in grades 1-2 and 3-4 are grouped together. Integrated ENL instruction is provided through a co-teaching model utilizing the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher holding the Common Branch License. Standalone ENL instruction takes place in small-groups either during reading, writing, or social studies. The lessons are driven by the teacher's pacing calendar, student needs in all four modalities, and overall proficiency levels of each student. Since native languages are not the focus of an ENL only program, the native language is validated at our school whenever possible during instructional periods. There are also no Bilingual classes at PS 185. This supports the parents’ first choice for service by ENL. In the Transitional Bilingual Education model, the bulk of classroom instruction is taught in the native language of the students in the classroom, supplemented by daily intensive English language instruction. As the students progress, more time is spent teaching in the student's native language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Freestanding ENL model, the language of instruction is English. All content is delivered in English, with literature available in the students' home language for newcomers who read and write in a language other then English. The purpose of this literature is to engage the student and is only used to transition newcomers in the first few months of school and provide them with meaningful, comprehensible literature during independent reading time. ELA, Math and all other content area is delivered in English. The ENL teacher uses ENL strategies to teach vocabulary, deconstruct and reconstruct text, and facilitate oral language development through response to literature, visuals, and through small group discuss. This year, PS 185 will use the National Geographic program "Reach" in order to provide comprehensive phonics, comprehension, and oral language instruction. This program focuses above all on vocabulary development, a need common to so many of the ELLs in our school. Math instruction is provided using the My Math program supplementary materials, with a focus on math vocabulary and problem solving. For those beginning students who speak Spanish as their first language, the ENL teacher provides Spanish language support often repeating questions or vocabulary in their native language. For those beginning students who have literacy skills in a home language other then Spanish, the ENL teachers encourage them to write in their home language and then, with the assistance of a student who has literacy skills in both languages, translate their writing into English. In regards to Common Core, this year ELLs will be instructed by three cluster teachers who focus on developing skills and tasks taken from the Common Core Learning Standards. This will provide ELL students with additional academic intervention as it relates to the higher demands of the Common Core . 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that Spanish-speaking Ells are appropriately evaluated in their native language upon enrollment, the ENL teacher administers the LAB-R in Spanish. PS 185K is currently in the process of creating screeners in languages other then English and Spanish. Finally, ELL students being evaluated for special education services are evaluated in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 CEP 63  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. When PS 185 identifies a student as SIFE, the classroom teacher in conjunction with cluster teachers and the ENL teacher identify areas of strength and weaknesses using informal and formal assessments. Through small group instruction and one-to-one instruction and conferencing, we aim to push this SIFE student to develop basic vocabulary, literacy skills, and basic math skills that will accelerate both language develop and overall academic achievement. This student is offered additional instruction through the extended-day program and the Title III after school program entitled "Small Steps to Success." b. For newcomer ELLs who have been in US schools for less than three years, the ENL teacher has specific instructional strategies for all newcomers. They need to be acclimated to the school setting. The ENL teachers endeavor to get them started with “survival English” which can help them to cope with day to day activities. The ENL teacher also works with the classroom teacher so that the new student is supported by a buddy / peer tutor in the classroom. The classroom teachers receive professional development on ENL methodologies through the network and in-house Professional Development facilitated by the ESL teacher. strategies for differentiated instruction that addresses the needs of Ells. In the ENL program, the newcomers are offered time in a listening center to support their instructional period of ENL through Balanced Literacy strategies. The ESL teacher tries to make the language taught relevant to everyday life. All instruction is guided by the NYS Learning Standards for ENL in conjunction with the new Common Core State Standards. Students are allowed extra response time in order to encourage participation. These students may also attend after school Title III programs. c. In order to service students that have been receiving four to six years, the ENL teachers offer the students at risk service where it is deemed necessary. We design authentic ENL learning experiences which focus on the areas of weakness. In most cases these students are verbal with a high level of comprehension. They do poorly on tests, however, because of their low level reading and writing skills. Therefore, we incorporate tasks which reflect all four language skills with a strong emphasis on reading, in the areas of vocabulary and inferencing, and writing. We also work via ENL to prepare the long term ELL for NYS assessments in core subject areas. These students may also attend the after school Title III sessions. d. P.S. 185 addresses the needs of students who are long term ELLs by carefully identifying their areas of weakness through item analysis on both formal and informal assessments. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher meet to discuss these strengths and weakness and create individualized instruction to work on these academic skills. Long term ELLs are invited to participate in Title III after school academic support and are provided with 120 minutes of additional instruction. e. P.S. 185 addresses the needs of students who are former ELLs by providing them with testing modifications (time and a half) on all interim assessments, predictive, and State Tests except for the NYSELAT. These students are also provided with 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction each week in the Content Area. In class, the academic needs of our former ELLs are addressed through small group instruction on their level and in one-to-one conferencing and targeted instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs-SWDs use manipulative and visuals, and other methodologies to address their individual needs in order to introduce and revisit topics covered by their classroom teacher. Teachers modify activities, assessments, and curriculum to meet the needs of ELLs with IEPs, integrating strategies used by their SWD teacher, speech, and/or SETTs teacher. To accelerate language development, teachers integrate videos into their classroom as a way to develop a deeper understanding of science and social studies concepts. Finally, to increase students oral language development in English, teachers utilize cd players and computer media players for listening activities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher is provided with the same pacing calendar used by classroom teachers in order to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive instruction that corresponds with what they are learning in their regular classroom. Additionally, the ENL teacher is given access to SESIS and reviews the IEP goals for the ELLs in question. In consultation with the classroom teacher, the ENL teacher plans lessons to address the goals in the IEP. Many ELL-SWDs receive integrated instruction in order to minimize time spent out of the classrooms for those students who 2018-19 CEP 64  are pulled out for other related services. Flexible programming is used in placing these students in classes where they are learning alongside general education students in an ICT classroom setting. Additionally, when ELL-SWDs are provided standalone instruction, they are learning alongside many Ells who do not have Special Needs, providing a less restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on state ELA and Math exam scores, benchmark assessments from the Lead 21 program, and Running Record reading level assessments, ELLs with SWDs have been identified as a subgroup in need of targeted academic intervention. Targeted intervention programs for these ELLs include the ENL components of the Open Court Phonics program for students in need of phonics instruction and the Mentoring Minds program for students who need additional support in reading comprehension. The supplemental components for both programs parallel the skills being taught in the mainstream classroom across the grades. In all grades, the teacher teaches guided reading in centers to reinforce differentiated reading skills for each group. In the lower grades, the teacher supports ELA skills with the additional materials from the Fundations Open Court, and the LEAD 21 program to align with the classroom teacher. These programs are used to encourage development in all areas for the newer ELLs and newcomers. The targeted intervention program in math focused on the language and vocabulary found in math, with a special emphasis on word problems utilizing supplementary materials from the My Math program. Students work alongside the ENL teachers to deconstruct language found in math problems in order to identify the steps or operations they must use in order to solve each problem. For Science and Social Studies, the ENL teachers work in guided reading groups to help students better understand topics and vocabulary using trade books that support the curriculum. Trade books to support science come from the Science Fusion program. Currently our targeted intervention program does not provide formal native language support. During targeted intervention sessions, students are often paired other students who speak the same native language. Learning Leaders who speak, read, and write in the student's native language also offer native language support during these targeted intervention sessions. The ENL teachers network with the school staff during classroom teachers’ common and individual preparation periods to provide and receive feedback in an on-going dialogue with the classroom and subject area teachers. Classroom teachers discuss student strengths and weaknesses with the ENL teacher in order for the ESL teacher to individualize instruction and provide for maximum growth. Classroom teachers are also supported with professional development activities which help them to improve the learning environment for ELLs. Focus is on the adaptation of Core Curriculum materials for the ELLs as well as on the various strategies which can be applied to the instruction of ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 185 will introduce an Open Court Phonics program for the grades K-2 and a Mentoring Minds program for grades 3-5, which also has a math component and ELA. The program entitled Science Fusion will be used to enrich science lessons in grades K-5 and Vocabulary Workshop will be used in grades 2-5 to support vocabulary development for all students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? PS 185 will no longer be using the LEAD 21 program for as the central program for Balanced Literacy. LEAD 21 is no longer being used at PS 185 because the company discontinued producing materials and providing support. This, coupled with the fact that LEAD 21 did not provide a phonics program, is the reason why 185 has switched to Open Court for the grades K-2 and Mentoring Minds for grades 3-5. Supplemental materials from LEAD 21 will still be used in most classes. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Certainly all ELLs may participate in all programs at P.S. 185, but they are also specifically encouraged to participate in such programs like after-school enrichment to better support their development. Enrichment this year includes, but is not limited to: yoga, building and design, comedy improv, word puzzles. P.S. 185 promotes achievement for all students. This year, we will invite Ells to participate in a Title III funded after school program with a focus on academic achievement in the area of literacy. PS 185 invites ELLs to Saturday Test Prep sessions for approximately a month prior to the NYS tests. Additionally, the ENL teacher runs after-school programs for ELLs. The after school program, entitled "Small Steps to Success" invites all to 2018-19 CEP 65  participate in a 90 minute small group intensive focusing on reading and writing strategies. These classes with content area focus allow ELL students to use the rich vocabulary of the various content areas in a supportive and exciting classroom environment. Teachers use materials related to the regular day classes. Part of the time also focuses on the language of tests and higher order thinking skills. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In addition to the Core Curriculum Materials, our ENL teachers use a variety of materials with their students. For building literacy skills, these materials include: Discovery Channel REACH Program K-5 Fundations, K-2 Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project ELA k-5 Go Math Math Benchmark K-5 (administered 3 times per year) Rigby Series - On Our Way to English, shared reading K-5, expanded in 2007 Rigby Series – On Our Way to English Newcomers Kit Hampton-Brown Series - Into English, Grades K-2 Macmillan/McGraw-Hill Series Attanasio & Associates, Inc. – Getting Ready For the NYSESLAT, K-5 SRA kits for grades 2-5 For Technology: Orchard Gold Star, ESL software program Starfall, website Kidspiration, literacy software program Mingoville, English for children through social media program on the Web ICT Literacy Games, website to strengthen student literacy. To support students in Math, the IXL online program is utilized for students in the upper grades. FastTrack is used for many ELLs with SWDs. For Science and Social Studies: Science Fusion Houghton Mifflin Grades K-5 NYC Department of Education Social Studies Unit K-5 Primary Scources Exploring History K-5 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher at P.S. 185 validates the native language spoken by all students whenever possible. The ENL teacher provides students with additional reading material in their native language in the form of online libraries, as needed. When there are incoming students, the ENL teachers pair them with a student who speaks their native language as well. For those beginning students who speak Spanish as their first language, the ENL teacher provides Spanish language support often repeating questions or vocabulary in their native language. For those beginning students who have literacy skills in a home language other then Spanish, the ENL teachers encourage them to write in their home language and then, with the assistance of a student who has literacy skills in both languages, translate their writing into English. In regards to Common Core, this year ELLs will be instructed by three cluster teachers who focus on developing skills and tasks taken from the Common Core Learning Standards. This will provide ELL students with additional academic intervention as it relates to the higher demands of the Common Core. Due to parent selection choices, Dual Language and TBE is not currently offered at PS 18K. However, PS185 is ready to implement either program effectively if required. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are grouped based on their grade, and/or grade-band, and proficiency. In order to meet the mandated minutes of instruction, ELLs are grouped together in grade bands when provided standalone ENL services. Students in grades 1-2 are grouped together, as well as students in grades 3-4. Students in grades K and 5 are grouped separately and exist in a group with mixed proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 66  In addition to the Core Curriculum Materials, our ENL teachers use a variety of materials with their students. For building literacy skills, these materials include: Discovery Channel REACH Program K-5 Fundations, K-2 Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project ELA k-5 Go Math Math Benchmark K-5 (administered 3 times per year) Rigby Series - On Our Way to English, shared reading K-5, expanded in 2007 Rigby Series – On Our Way to English Newcomers Kit Hampton-Brown Series - Into English, Grades K-2 Macmillan/McGraw-Hill Series Attanasio & Associates, Inc. – Getting Ready For the NYSESLAT, K-5 SRA kits for grades 2-5 For Technology: Orchard Gold Star, ESL software program Starfall, website Kidspiration, literacy software program Mingoville, English for children through social media program on the Web ICT Literacy Games, website to strengthen student literacy. To support students in Math, the IXL online program is utilized for students in the upper grades. FastTrack is used for many ELLs with SWDs. For Science and Social Studies: Science Fusion Houghton Mifflin Grades K-5 NYC Department of Education Social Studies Unit K-5 Primary Scources Exploring History K-5 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, the ENL teacher recommends to the teachers some of the technological resources with which the newcomer ELLs can follow along. Then the teachers prepare for tutoring sessions especially for incoming students during the year. The ENL teacher encourages the classroom teachers to create language buddies to support the students in their native language. Additionally, the ENL teacher utilizes the parent learning leaders who volunteer at the school on a weekly basis. These parents provide additional language support to the newcomer ENL students. Within the first month of school the ESL teacher in conjunction with classroom teachers make anecdotal observations regarding the interests of each individual student in order to plan activities that would meet both their social and academic needs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 67  1. The ENL teacher offers Professional Development (PD) to staff members on ENL techniques and strategies at grade meetings in early November, March, and May. Staff members receiving the professional development include the assistant principal, the two paraprofessionals, special education teachers, and the Occupational, Physical, and Speech therapists at our school.. The ENL teacher participates in grade meetings, Student Progress Teams, and curriculum mapping workshops to ensure that particular attention is paid to meet the needs of the Ells at each grade level. This year, the ENL teacher attended " Understanding ELLs - Part 2," focusing on RTI, the AMAO tool, and Universal Design for Learning (UDI) on October 26 th. Also, the ENL teacher attended "Enhancing Instructional supports in ENL and the integrated ENL classroom" on November 3 rd . Material from PDs is always turnkeyed to the school staff at grade conferences or during Monday PD sessions. Teachers of ELLs are provided support for the Common Core Learning Standards in the form of PD from the two Common Core Cluster teachers at PS 185. Additional support is provided through PDs hosted by the Borough Field Support Center or the representatives from the office of DELLs. PD is also provided for non-pedagogic staff in the areas of cultural sensitivity, and tools that can be used to communicate with students and parents that are limited English proficient. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 185 provides the PD to prepare students for the academic rigor of middle school. Our parent coordinator provides direct in classroom sessions dedicated to middle school transition. Parents are supplied with dates of open houses for intermediate and middle schools in our district. In addition, our parent coordinator, Mary Maguire conducts a workshop annually to disseminate information about intermediate and junion high schools. Our parent coordinator serves as a liaison for parents of graduating students regarding JHS fairs and site visits. The administration supports the attendance of the ENL teacher at all PD available in the region. The ENL teacher at PS 185 provides the parents of Ells with information about the ENL programs offered at other middle schools in the district in the event that these students do not pass the NYSELAT. As mandated by CR Part 80, 15% of the required total hours of training for all staff and administrators other than ENL teachers are provided through PD at grade level conferences, common planning sessions, and Monday PD sessions in November, December, and January. At these meetings, the ENL teacher will conduct workshops focused on integrating content and instruction for teachers of ELLs, co-teaching best practices, as well as turnkey information from workshops attended through the district. The ENL teacher receives the required 50% of total hours from ENL workshops attended in the district. Records of training are maintained by the administration through the use of attendance sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 185 will host annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs in order to discuss goals of the program, language development, language proficiency assessment results, and language needs. In order to prepare for these meetings, the ENL teacher will administer the ELL Periodic Assessments, conduct an item analysis from the state ELA, Math exams, and other in-class assessments, and meet with all teachers of ELLs to discuss the language development of the ENLs in their class. The ENL teacher will send out letters in the preferred language of each parent inviting them to meet to discuss their child's progress. PS 185 will utilize translators from the NYCDOE and bilingual parents who can assist in providing translation during the meeting. The ENL teacher will also utilize the translation hotline for those low incidence languages. The meetings will be held throughout the months of January and February 2016 and will be scheduled according to the needs of the parents, translators, and teachers involved. 2. (see below) In order to identify the language needs of the parents and create an appropriate schedule for the translators, the instructional specialist, ENL teacher, and the parent coordinator will meet to review the preferred language forms (cross referenced with information gathered from the HLIS). Records of these individual annual meetings will be kept with the parent coordinator and the ENL teacher. 2018-19 CEP 68  3. During all parental meetings, the teachers will discuss their ELLs language development needs across all content areas, using their student's language proficiency assessment results, and language development progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. (response to #2) All records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents and outreach (phone calls, letters, in person meetings) will be kept with the ENL teacher. If they involve parent outreach, they will be kept in the office of the parent coordinator, or the classroom of the teacher contacting the parent. (response to #3) PS 185 is a parent friendly school; we are receptive to all parents. We have translators available for non-English speaking parents and try to make the newcomers' transition to the NYC Public School System a smooth one. We hold a meeting each fall to welcome the parents of our ELL students and to tell the parents about the programs in which their child/children can participate. Parents of all students can stay involved by becoming a learning leader and assisting in the classroom, helping to run our Go Green Committee and our after school enrichment programs, and becoming a member and participant at our monthly PTA meetings. Workshops are also conducted by Learning Leaders with on site interpretation made availbe upon parent request. Anticipated events for this year include a multiculural night, a multicultural pot-luck, and a literacy night. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rena Goudelias, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 185 Walter Kassenbrock School DBN: 20K185 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mrs. Rena Goudelias Title Principal Ms. Melissa Meahl Assistant Principal Mary Maguire Parent Coordinator Thomas Brown ENL/Bilingual Teacher Adele Doyle Parent Lisa Arico/3rd grade Teacher/Subject Area Betty Appelbaum/K Teacher/Subject Area Maryann Gureli Coach Coach Jennifer Lamanna School Counselor Karina Costantino Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Medina-Perez Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 10/20/17 2018-19 CEP 71  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K185 School Name: PS 185 Superintendent: K Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Thomas Mary Brown Maguire ELL Coordinator Parent Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At PS 185, parents' preferred languages are entered into ATS upon student registration using information from multiple sources. The Parent Coordinator conducts a school wide parent survey, in multiple languages, assessing parent needs. Parent language needs are also collected from the classroom teachers and the ENL staff and this information is validated using the RHLA report through ATS. This information is cross-checked with responses from Part III on the HLIS, and with information contained on the blue emergency cards. If there are major discrepancies among these sources, the parent coordinator reaches out to parents to ensure that their preferred language for both written and oral communication are documented accurately. 2018-19 CEP 72  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese Cantonese Greek English Russian Spanish Ukrainian 26 2 9 0 1 535 8 28 1 4.26 0.33 1.48 0 0.16 87.7 1.31 4.59 0.16 26 3 10 1 1 534 8 26 1 4.26 0.49 1.64 0.16 0.16 87.54 1.31 4.26 0.16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A, Our total ELL population is 8.11% Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Emergency Signs and Dismissal Procedures September, first week of school Office of Family and Community Engagement (FACE)Workshop Flyers October, January, March, May Throughout the year as needed. Parent and Student Handbooks September, first week of school Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The parent handbook and discipline code are translated and given to parents in September by usinga DOE contracted translation service 4-5 weeks prior to dissemination. These flyers come from FACE already translated into common languages other than English. All other languages are sent to a DOE contracted translation service 4-5 weeks prior to dissemination. All languages other than English are sent to a DOE contracted translation 2018-19 CEP 73  service 4-5 weeks prior to dissemination. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September, second week of school. Parent Teacher Conferences November, January, March Cultural Potlock April interpretation service(s)? Our school will use staff that speak Arabic, Russian, Ukrainian, Greek, and Spanish to provide interpretation. Any languages other than those will be interpreted through the use of a DOE contracted over the phone interpretation service (Langauge Line). Our school will use staff that speak Arabic, Russian, Ukrainian, Greek, and Spanish to provide interpretation. Any languages other than those will be interpreted through the use of a DOE contracted over the phone interpretation service (Langauge Line). Our school will use staff that speak Arabic, Russian, Ukrainian, Greek, and Spanish to provide interpretation. Any languages other than those will be interpreted through the use of a DOE contracted over the phone interpretation service (Langauge Line). 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school has at least one staff member that speaks Spanish, Greek, Arabic, or Russian. The staff members will assist in making phone calls in case of an emergency. If the home language is other than those 4 languages, we will use the DOE over-the-phone-interpretation service, to conference call the families. In the event of an emergency, School Messenger is used to notify families with specific details regarding the situation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 74  At the beginning of each school year, and periodically throughout the year, one of the LACs will hold a professional development session on all applicable regulations and procedures. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signage is posted in the lobby of the building. Language ID cards are with the Security staff and staff in the Main Office. Parents are informed of the bilingual accessibility of the DOE website. Parents are informed, in a handbook in their native language, that translation and interpretation services are available to them upon request. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys are conducted periodically throughout the academic school year in order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Teachers and support staff will inquire about the effectiveness of these services during parent teacher conferences. 2018-19 CEP 75 
