2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K191 School Name: P.S. 191 PAUL ROBESON Principal: HADAR GAHFI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PAUL ROBESON ELEMENTARY SCHOOL P.S. 191 331700010191 Pre K- 5 School Number (DBN): 17K191 1600 Park Place Brooklyn NY 11233 ( 718) 756-1206 ( 718) 756-5417 Phone Number: Mrs. HadarGahfi Fax: Email Address: hgahfi@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mrs. HadarGahfi (I.A.) Mrs. C. Poole Ms. Rosa Velez Mrs. HadarGahfi Mr. J. Butler N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mr. Clarence Ellis Superintendent: 1224 Park Place Brooklyn NY 11213 CEllis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 221-4372 Phone Number: (718) 221-4326 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn-D17 Mauricierre De Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov. Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-4862 Phone Number: (718) 630-1634 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Mrs. HadarGahfi (I.A.) Mrs. C. Poole Ms. Rosa Velez Ms. S. Witter-Clue Mr.J. Butler N/A N/A Ms. T. Jones Ms. Cooper-Kemp Ms. Davis Ms. T. Parrish *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Parents  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. B. Ambrose Ms. A.Fairclough Ms. Kirby Member/ Parents Member/Parents Member/Parents Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: We are College and Career Ready! The mission of P.S. 191, The Paul Robeson Elementary School is to collaborate with all stakeholders of our school community and beyond, to support all our scholars, inclusive of students with special needs and English Language Learners, maintaining P.S. 191 as the 'HUB' and nucleus of the community. We are confident all students will progress 2018-19 CEP 9  and achieve excellence when given opportunities to successfully meet and exceed academic and social/emotional milestones and benchmarks. P.S. 191 is dedicated to nurturing and supporting the development of collaborative, knowledgeable, proficient, and responsible scholars who will reason critically and present as productive members of the school, community, and broader society. School personnel, with the emphasis on college and career readiness, have high expectations for all our scholars. Our learning environment, conducive to student progress and achievement, will enable all students to achieve high levels of academic and social/emotional performance. To facilitate the variety of enrichment activities, we rely upon grant funds from a variety of sources, including federal, state, tax levy, and competitive and discretionary grants from local legislators. The Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams granted funding to P.S. 191 totaling $1,900,000 to purchase instructional supports such as new computers for our students, a New Upper- Academy Library, a New STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) Laboratory, Library books for all grade levels, and (STEAM) supplies and supports. Additionally, Council Member Alika Ampry-Samuel provided funding to support two dance artists who will provide instruction to students in Pre-Kindergarten through grade 5. This grant supports P.S. 191's dedication and commitment to the Arts as a means of Academic and Social/Emotional Support. This generous grant allows for Dance Instruction for each student of P.S. 191. The Dance Artists utilize the two state-of-the-art Dance Studios at P.S. 191, granted by the Annenberg Foundation. Global Focus Safety   Kindness  Respect   Higher Staff and Student Attendance and Increased Enrollment of Students  Punctuality Rate Student Academic and Social/Emotional Levels: 3 and 4 Partnerships  METS Foundation: Uniforms, BookBags, and School Supplies  NYJTL: After-School Program  Borough President Office: 30 Laptops in each Classroom, 51 Computer Desktops for Computer Laboratory, STEAM Mobile Labs, STEAM Classroom, New Library  City Council Office: Dance Art Program  Office of Mental Health: Staff and Parent Workshops  Victory Dance: Dance Program and Prospective New After-School Program  NYPD: Safety lessons for students 2018-19 CEP 10   FDNY: Fire and Smoke Safety/Smoke House on Wheels  Con Edison: Electricity Conservation  OSYD: Restorative-Schools series on school site  Mighty Milers: Physical Education Fitness Program  CookShop: Healthily habits learning for students and families  NY Cares: School-Wide Murals Our School Website: https://sites.google.com/view/ps191paulrobesonschool Our Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/PS191K17/ Changes 2018-2019 School Year:  June 12, 2018, Mr. Saul Katz of the METS has donated 2 complete uniforms, a book bag, and school supplies to each student for the 2018-2019 school year. Mr. Saul Katz graduated from P.S. 191 in 1948. Mr. Katz visited with us on May 23, 2018. Invite Registration Cards for the Community Invite Registration Posters in and Outside School Building  New Uniform Colors  New Main Office Location (121)  New PTA Room Location (205)  New Staff Lounge Location (214)  New Classroom Location (101)    Technology:    New STEAM Classroom (102)  New Student Library (201)  51 New Computers for Student Computer Laboratory  STEM LABS MOBILE in Each Classroom with Technology Component Laptop Cart in each Classroom Senior Teachers in Early Childhood Beginning with Second Grade  Hired 3.5 additional teachers  Hired a NYCDOE Speech Pathologist  P.S. 191 Achievement Academy After- School Program Beginning in September 2018 through June 2019 for: Progress, Achievement, and Enrichment  P.S. 191 Achievement Academy After- School Program Beginning in September 2018 through June 2019 for: AIS and RTI 2018-19 CEP 11  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. P.S. 191 is a high staff-retention school. The Danielson Framework Training and related aspects of said rubric was attended by every teacher at P.S. 191 beginning in June 2013 and during the course of the summer of 2013. .Danielson Framework Training continued through the 2013-2018 school years and will continue throughout the current 2018-2019. Pedagogues attend/ed NYCDOE sponsored Danielson Framework Trainings as well as in-school training by the Supervisory Support Team as well as by Teacher Leaders. Supervisors each attended the 7-hour summer training session and several of the borough-wide Teacher Effectiveness Training sessions held in Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island. ll training sessions required the recording of low-inference observations. Our school has been a Common Core Laboratory Site School, currently in our fifth year, with “Teacher Ambassadors” regularly attending (with the administration) workshops related to the Common Core Standards Shift and the utilization of the Instructional Planning Guides in ELA and Mathematics. Two P.S. 191 Ambassadors attended a full week of training in Albany, New York, at the State Education Department during the summer of 2013. Instructional Planning Guides are compared and contrasted to and with the Danielson Framework by supervisors, with teacher input, as evaluative measures which are not mutually exclusive. Classroom lesson observations and teacher inter-visitations are facilitated and arranged by the supervisors of P.S. 191, and the NYCDOE Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach office. Supervisors utilized the Danielson Framework Rubric on lesson observation reports during the 2012-2013 school year based upon on-site training at P.S. 191, though not a Danielson Framework pilot school and not required to do so. The 22 components were not granted individual values as part of the observation reports but the Rubrics for Coherent Instructional Planning, Questioning and Assessment were included in the memorialized observation reports as additional resourceful tools for reflection of teacher practices. We currently continue this practice incorporating the current evaluated Eight Danielson Rubric Components as part of our Pre-Kindergarten observations although Pre-Kindergarten is not an identified classroom on the ADVANCE Teacher Evaluation System. The administration received/s intensely relevant professional development services from the DOE Office of Teacher Effectiveness. The Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach, observes lessons with the administration of P.S. 191 2018-19 CEP 12  with an examination of low-inference evidence-based annotations and a subsequent segment on rating the components of the selected Domain with justification and evidence cited. 2018-2019 Visits to classrooms will reflect clear expectations in relation to non-negotiable elements: ● Classroom Data Folder ● Yearly Student Portfolio Folders featuring a monthly entry beginning in September every academic year and ending in June of every academic year ● The periodic use of a Mathematics Journal which asks the questions “What did I learn in Mathematics today?” and “How can I use it in real life as part of a career choice?” ● The periodic use of a Reading Response Journal which asks a focus question ● Posted teacher goals in the four content areas which are updated in six week cycles with copies submitted to the supervisors ● Teacher-written goals which are updated in six week cycles, supported by and developed with supervisory feed-back and maintained by the classroom teacher with copies submitted to the supervisors ● Student-written goals which are updated in six week cycles, supported by and developed with teacher feed-back and maintained by the classroom teacher with copies submitted to the supervisors ● Multiple Points of Entry groups utilized for instructional lessons ● Multiple Student Learning Stations ascribed a University/College name ● Multi-media access and support inclusive of classroom computers, dry-erase boards, and leveled libraries with a rug area ● A Smart Board in every classroom, many with Camera Documents Cameras (Elmos) and Projectors attached ● Guided and Independent Reading Level charts also posted in the Supervisor’s offices ● Academic Intervention charts depicting student information as to were held over, attended summer school ● Conferencing area with feedback prompts ● ENL literature in classrooms where ENL students are enrolled ● Teacher Data Binders with information on SWDs and ENLs and lowest 1/3 subgroups ● Every classroom features ReadyGen and Go Math materials for the teacher and students ● Every classroom, at the request of teachers, purchased and features a supplementary reading series, entitled Wonders, published by McGraw Hill, and MyMath, also published by McGraw Hill, in anticipation of difficulties associated with the delivery of the Common Core ● Every P.S. 191 After-School Program classroom, at the request of the teachers, purchased and features supplementary reading and mathematics series, entitled, Finish Line, Ready New York CCLS and Common Core English language Arts and Mathematics State Standards student workbooks and review materials. Each student takes ownership of his/her varying levels of achievement on baseline assessment results and MOSL assessments as evidenced by the interactive labeling they themselves do in the inquiry room (Data Room) by placing his/her labeled stickie note bearing his/her name written on the appropriate examination and standards result chart. In some cases the stickie note has the percentage rate of correct responses also written by the child as per the official results chart thereby raising the child’s awareness of his/her level of achievement. Every six weeks a Student Progress Report is sent home to parents informing them of the following: Teachers have a space devoted on this progress report for additional comments specific to each child. ● Their child’s current reading levels (Independent and Guided) ● The status of their child’s progress and achievement in the four core learning content areas; ELA, Mathematics, Social Studies and Science ● The status of their child’s social/emotional progress and achievement 2018-19 CEP 13  ● Student attendance (Days Absent and/or Late) ● Book Reports completion status ● Current Events Projects completion status ● Homework Completion update ● Student Uniform Wear update ● Next Steps We have continued Community-Based Organization partnerships. Our Community-Based Organizations Partnerships: NYJTL: New York Junior Tennis League Mighty Milers: Fitness Program CookShop: Healthly habits learning for students and families Victory Dance: Dance instruction utilizing Dance Artists or Early-Childhood and the Upper-Academy Brownsville Community Center: Our partnership will result in their donation of bookbags to our students in temporary housing (33% of our student-body) FDNY: FDNY visits regularly with our classes to reinforce fire and smoke safety and necessity of fire and carbon monoxide alarms,. They bring with them a mobile 'Smoke House' trailer where our students can walk into and have fire safety lessons inside. They also supply our students and families with fire and carbon monoxide alarms, additional batteries for the alarms, and fire safety coloring books. NYPD Con Edison NY Cares 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Special Student Populations data is identified, reviewed, and monitored cyclically utilizing NYS, NYC, and ReadyGen and GoMath curriculum assessments as well as 'real time' student data utilizing genuine and organic teacher-developed daily and weekly assessments and student conferencing data , to ensure customized individual student instruction aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Our most current NYS English Language Arts and Mathematics data reflects the following. 2018-19 CEP 14  Data is based on the most current preliminary NYS and Mathematics 'met/did not meet' scores.  2018: 62.6% met proficiency criterion (levels 3, and 4) on the New York State English Language Arts Assessment  2018 64.6% met promotional criterion (levels 3, and 4) on the New York Mathematics Assessment Our most current sub-groups are: . Students with Special Needs . Students with English as a New Language . Students in Temporary Housing There are budget allocations for each of our sub-groups to support academic and social/emotional progress and achievement. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Danielson Framework has impacted student progress and achievement as evidenced by the improved results of the 2018 NYS ELA and Mathematics examinations, NYC MOSL results, in-house assessments and learning outcomes, the improved quality and quantity of student writing, and the due consideration given to lesson flexibility, the adjustment of lesson content, and the efforts of pedagogues to increase their own knowledge of instructional content with a focus on multiple points of curricular entry. Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. Rigor at P.S. 191 is characterized by the implementation and utilization of supervisory and teacher-revised instructional pacing schedules, which are aligned to the Common Core Shift in the core content areas of social studies, literacy, science and mathematics. It is further evidenced in the efforts of teachers and paraprofessionals to engage and challenge pupils to “extend their thinking”, to self-evaluate, to express and request feedback from teachers and peers and to attend school daily towards a furtherance of anticipated career choices. Data is based on the most current preliminary NYS and Mathematics 'met/did not meet' scores.  2018: 62.6% met proficiency criterion (levels 3, and 4) on the New York State English Language Arts Assessment  2018 64.6% met promotional criterion (levels 3, and 4) on the New York Mathematics Assessment 2018-19 CEP 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K191 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 170 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 19 12 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.1% % Reduced Lunch 8.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 15.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 6% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 24 24 12 87.5% 1.8% 25.3% 80.0% 1.8% 2.9% 2 6% 2.1 64.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Needs Assessment was based on the results on the New York State English Language Arts Assessments. The following data was reviewed in determining this goal: The 2016-2017 NYS ELA examination, The 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, School Quality Review, SchoolNet data, and Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Interim Assessments. NYS Data is based on the most current preliminary NYS and Mathematics 'met/did not meet' scores. The 2018 New York State ELA results indicate: Grades three, four, and five 2018: 62.6% met proficiency criterion (levels 3, and 4) on the New York State English Language Arts Assessment P.S. 191's most recent School Quality Review indicates: We are a Proficient School. Our below stated Annual Goal and Action Plan delineates strategies and best- practices P.S. 191 has developed to support our students to achieve Proficiency Level 3 and above, and a Well Developed designation in all School Quality Review indicators as well as an overall designation of SQR Well Developed, insuring committed and rigorous best-practices implementation in the SQR Instructional Core, School Culture, and Systems for Improvement categories. Such initiatives include: Fractions Fridays, Science Fridays, 'Real-Time' authentic, organic teacher-made assessments and student conferencing assessments conducted weekly, and the instructional implementation of ReadyGen module B units as the primary literary instructional focus with Module A utilized as a foundational supplemental resource. The most recent School Quality Guide indicates: We are a school in Good Standing 2018-19 CEP 17  Student Progress: Exceeding Target Student Achievement: Meeting Target Closing the Achievement Gap: Exceeding Target Our School-wide Instructional Focus. Pre-K through Grade Five, is the English Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum-student learning aligned with the CCLS. Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Teacher Team members (inclusive of all the teachers of P.S. 191) will utilize the following District 17’s Initiative, Data Wise 'Swoosh' and Protocols. This will be utilized as an assessment tool to analyze school and individual student data to support rigorous instruction, facilitating student academic and social/emotional progress and achievement, by developing data-based lesson-planning and multiple entry points for learning differentiated, flexible small group instruction to facilitate student engagement and college and career readiness. As an additional initiative for 2018-2019, all Teacher Assistants will be members of a Teacher Team as well. Inquiring Introduction Protocol  Constructing The Improvement Process Protocol  The Coherence Protocol   The Question Formulation Technique  Affinity Protocol  Plus/Delta Protocol 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Using the Common Core State Standards for Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5, with the goal in mind of college and career readiness reflective of the demands of the 21st century, teachers will implement pedagogical practices that focus on the following instructional shifts: Students are to demonstrate required fluency, application, and conceptual understanding in English Language Arts; Students are required to engage in reading, writing, and discussions from texts in English Language Arts, Social Studies, and Science; for example, after reading Charlotte’s Web , a second grade student may write an essay that explains the author’s lesson in resilience. The school will implement effective small group, phonics based literacy instruction for students in grades K through 2 inclusive of Special Education and English as a New Language Learners using the components of Balanced Literacy, Ready Gen, Go Math, Guided Reading, and My Math (as a supplement) Targets are set and measured as per the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) benchmarks. Any and all progress is also measured through interim assessments given by the city and through school wide and in-class teacher-developed assessments. MOSL Administrastion 1.September 2018-October 2018 administer and score 2. November 2018- December 2018: analyze baseline assessments 3. November 2018 - May 2019: monitoring progress of students via in-house assessments 4. April- June 2019: Administer and Analyze MOSL Assessments As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local (New York State) funds such as Fair Student funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, and human resources to implement this action plan from September 2018 through June 2019 as indicated below: Human Resources Positions . Principal . Assistant Principal . Staff Developers (internal and external) . Data Specialist . ENL Coordinator . Teachers The instructional focus will be on word study, (phonics, word families, etc.), Questioning and Discussion techniques, inferential and analytical thinking, comprehension and writing skills that result in documented progress. Based on New York City MOSL Assessment Feedback Kindergarten through Grade 2 will focus on the following English Language Arts skills: Dates: 9/2018, 12/2018, 3/2019, 5/2019 2018-19 CEP 19  . Reading Informational Texts; . AIS providers . Writing, Speaking, Listening . Language Acquisition . Dictation . Informative Text Aspects . Organization of print . Who, What, When, Where, Why, and How The school will implement effective small group differentiated learning opportunities, phonics based literacy instruction, and independent reading opportunities for students in grades 3 through 5 inclusive of Special Education and English as a New Language Learners using the components of Balanced Literacy, Ready Gen, Go Math, Guided Reading, and 100 Book Challenge. Monthly English Language Arts Promotion Folder Entries as follows: i. September: Personal Narrative ii. October: Opinion Writing iii. November: Descriptive Essay Writing iv. December: Informational Writing / All About Report v. January: Persuasive Writing vi. February: Poetry vii. March: Writing a Biography viii. April: Letter Writing ix. May: Narrative Procedure x. June: Research Report 1) Three to six small skill ability differentiated groups will be established in each class. Results from the spring 2018, New York State ELA examination and the MOSL Interim Assessments will be used to form the groupings. Two to three additional instructors will push into each class. The focus of instruction will be comprehension and writing skills. Content Targets are set and measured as per the Measures of Student Learning 1. September 2018- October 20178 . After-school staff . Using Fair Student Funding monies our arts programs provide dance, music, theater, visual arts, and curriculum link with an alignment and concentration in mathematical concept (rhythm, musical notation, etc.) and Social Studies instruction. Materials and Manipulatives Resources . Supplies: consumable books, paper, writing supplies, mathematics manipulatives, maps, science tools, etc. . Technology: hardware, software, audio-visual equipment (Smart Boards), overhead projectors, etc. . Physical Education supplies related to the integration of literacy and mathematical concepts As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local 2018-19 CEP 20  area materials will be used. All instruction will be aligned to Common Core State Standards. (MOSL) benchmarks. Any and all progress is also measured through interim assessments given by the city and through school wide and in-class teacher-developed assessments. administer and score (New York State) funds 2. November 2018- December 2018: analyze baseline assessments 3. November 2018 - May 2019: monitoring progress of students via in-house assessments 4. April- June 2019: Administer and Analyze MOSL Assessments such as Fair Student funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, and human resources to implement this action plan from September 2018 through June 2019 as indicated below: Human Resources Positions . Principal . Assistant Principal . Staff Developers (internal and external) . Data Specialist . ESL Coordinator . Teachers . AIS providers . After-school staff . Using Fair Student Funding monies our arts programs provide dance, music, theater, visual arts, and curriculum link with an alignment and concentration in mathematical concept (rhythm, musical notation, etc.) and Social Studies instruction. 2018-19 CEP 21  Materials and Manipulatives Resources . Supplies: consumable books, paper, writing supplies, mathematics manipulatives, maps, science tools, etc. . Technology: hardware, software, audio-visual equipment (Smart Boards), overhead projectors, etc. . Physical Education supplies related to the integration of literacy and mathematical concepts As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local (New York State) funds such as Fair Student funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, and human resources to implement this action plan from September 2018 through June 2019 as indicated below: Human Resources Positions . Principal 2) Entire grades will meet for test sophistication in literacy. Different skills will be addressed daily using the Balanced Literacy Components. Skills will be targeted through the analysis of Interim Assessment test data. Tests will include mandatory interim assessments in addition to school-generated and teacher prepared assessments based upon formalized Interim Assessment assessments. Grades 3 through 5 will focus on the following English Language Arts skills: . Reading Informational Texts . Writing . Speaking and Listening . Language Acquisition . Making inferences . Citing text evidence as support to a response . Opinion essay writing Targets are set and measured as per the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) benchmarks. Any and all progress is also measured through interim assessments given by the city and through school wide and in-class teacher-developed assessments. 1. September 2018- October 2018 administer and score 2. November 2018- December 2018: analyze baseline assessments 3. November 2018 - May 2019: monitoring progress of students via in-house assessments 2018-19 CEP 22  Additionally, as per the 2017-2018 Citywide Instructional Expectations instructional focus will include: . Using questioning and discussion techniques . Engaging students in learning . Using assessment in instruction o Based on learning goals, teachers will identify possible interpretations of text and anticipated challenges to plan carefully sequenced text-dependent questions that both check and deepen students’ understanding of new content/text. o Students will develop persistence and patience while grappling with new and complex tasks and concepts o Students will engage in numerous opportunities in which student to student and student group discussions are encouraged. . Evidence in Argument o Students will develop the skill of using evidence to support arguments in discussion, which will then transfer to stronger writing in literacy and math, and develop the communication and collaboration skills that support college and career readiness. . Connecting learning to experience o Texts and experiences enhance each other to strengthen students’ background knowledge and engagement with learning. Text-based activities will take place in addition to rich, shared experiential learning through hands-on projects, activities, and trips. Students will reflect on their experiences and understanding of new content. 4. April- June 2019: Administer and Analyze MOSL Assessments . Assistant Principal . Staff Developers (internal and external) . Data Specialist . ESL Coordinator . Teachers . AIS providers . After-school staff . Using Fair Student Funding monies our arts programs provide dance, music, theater, visual arts, and curriculum link with an alignment and concentration in mathematical concept (rhythm, musical notation, etc.) and Social Studies instruction. Non-Human Resources . Supplies: consumable books, paper, writing supplies, mathematics manipulatives, maps, science tools, etc. . Technology: hardware, software, audio-visual equipment (Smart Boards), overhead projectors, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  . Physical Education supplies related to the integration of literacy and mathematical concepts 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Every other Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Furthermore, teachers have embedded in their teaching programs a Preparation Period daily. Every six weeks Parents/Caregivers receive a new Progress Report for their child/children which includes academic progress and achievement, social/emotional progress and achievement attendance, uniform wear, book reports, current events, next steps, and parents are notified of the teacher meeting availability periods and encouraged to come to the school to meet with us.Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. The Parent Coordinator will be integral in facilitating Book Clubs, School Tours, Family Involvement and outreach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Literacy Block – Grade K-5 a. Whole Class b. 90 minutes 2. Literacy Initiatives- Grades 3-5 a. By class group b. 4 times per week, 45 minutes per day 3. Guided Reading – Small Group a. Push-in small group b. 5 times per week, during school day 4. At Risk Small Group Literacy Grades K-5 2018-19 CEP 24  a. Push-in, Pull-out, small group b. 5 times per week, during school day 5. P.S. 191 After-School Program – New York Junior Tennis League a. Small group tutoring b. 5 times per week, 2.5 hours for grades 1 through 5 6. English Language Arts Upper-Grade Academy P.S. 191 Afterschool program a. per-session funds used b. additional supplemental curriculum purchased Teacher per session Supervisor per session Curriculum and Supplemental Curriculum: ReadyGen, GoMath!, Fundations, Wonders, MY Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The MOSL Interim Assessments are administered four times a school year: September, December, March, and May. In addition, ReadyGen and GoMath unit assessments are administered as per P.S. 191 unit pacing schedule. Furthermore, 'Real-Time' authentic, organic teacher-made assessments and student conferencing assessments conducted weekly. Data garnered from the aforementioned assessments, as well as the NYS Examinations, are utilized to continually review and interpret data, impacting directly lesson planning, student grouping, teaching, and student learning. After the second administration and data results analysis of the MOSL Interim Assessments, the students will have increased by 15% from the first MOSL Interim Administration. . Weekly homework sheets are sent home with current content area work for parents/care givers to review. Parents and care givers are welcome to contact the school or their child’s teacher for more information. . Monthly progress reports to parents/ caregivers . Monthly parent/ caregiver calendars are sent home detailing important meetings and events for each month. 2018-19 CEP 25  . Parents and care giver are also encouraged to log into SchoolNet in order to monitor their child’s progress on interim assessments throughout the year. Passwords are provided to all parents and care givers. A computer is available for any parent and/or caregiver who wish to access data if they do not have access to the Internet at home. . The school will implement effective small group differentiated learning opportunities, phonics based literacy instruction, and independent reading opportunities for students in grades 3 through 5 inclusive of Special Education and English Language Learners using the components of Balanced Literacy, Ready Gen, Go Math, Guided Reading, and 100 Book Challenge. . Three to six small skill ability differentiated groups will be established in each class. Results from the spring 2018, New York State ELA examination and the MOSL Interim Assessments will be used to form the groupings. Two to three additional instructors will push into each class. The focus of instruction will be comprehension and writing skills. Content area materials will be used. All instruction will be aligned to Common Core State Standards. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYS Assessments, NYC MOSL, Real-Time Assessments - P.S. 191’s, Weekly, In-House Assessments in the Four Core-Content Learning Areas. After the second administration and data results analysis of the MOSL Interim Assessments, the students will have increased by 15% from the first MOSL Interim Administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Needs Assessment was based on the results on the New York State Mathematics assessment. The following data was reviewed in determining this goal: The 2017-2018 NYS Mathematics assessment, The 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, School Quality Review, SchoolNet data, and Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Interim Assessments.  2018 64.6% met promotional criterion (levels 3, and 4) on the New York Mathematics Assessment P.S. 191's recent School Quality Review indicates: We are a Proficient School. Our below stated Annual Goal and Action Plan delineates strategies and best- practices P.S. 191 has developed to support our students to achieve Proficiency Level 3 and above, and a Well Developed designation in all School Quality Review indicators as well as an overall designation of SQR Well Developed, insuring committed and rigorous best-practices implementation in the SQR Instructional Core, School Culture, and Systems for Improvement categories. Such initiatives include: Fractions Fridays, Science Fridays, 'Real-Time' authentic, organic teacher-made assessments and student conferencing assessments conducted weekly, and the instructional implementation of ReadyGen module B units as the primary literary instructional focus with Module A utilized as a foundational supplemental resource. The most recent School Quality Guide indicates: We are a school in Good Standing Student Progress: Exceeding Target Student Achievement: Meeting Target Closing the Achievement Gap: Exceeding Target 2018-19 CEP 27  Our School-wide Instructional Focus. Pre-K through Grade Five, is the English Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum-student learning aligned with the CCLS. Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the staff of P.S. 191 will support and encourage the academic and social/emotional engagement of students and family involvement and collaboration while utilizing and integrating the Restorative Schools Mindset and Practices and Social Emotional and Academic Learning and Leadership Principles in our daily school activities and interaction with students. Currently, the Principal and 6 teachers are trained. Trained staff members as well as our CBO Partner the Office of Mental Health, will support schoolwide/community training sessions throughout the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  There is the daily 75 minute “Balanced Mathematics” Math Block using Chancellor-approved GoMath program: Mathematics Review – skills review; Math Message; Problem of the Day - Daily Mathematics Journal Writing: -- What did I learn using GoMath! today? How will I apply this knowledge to real life and future career goals? Formative teacher-generated examinations are administered each month. GoMath chapter tests are administered. Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) interim assessments to be administered three times per year Personalized in-house monthly testing in mathematics, which are graded according to a teacher-generated key and is “leveled.” Monthly Mathematics Promotion Folder Entries as follows: i. September: Graphing ii. October: Probability iii. November: Perimeter and Area iv. December: Fractions v. January: Measurement Tools vi. February: Problem Solving Targets are set and measured as per the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) benchmarks. Any and all progress is also measured through interim assessments given by the city and through school wide and in-class teacher-developed assessments. MOSL 1.September 2018- October 2018 administer and score 2. November 2018- December 2018: analyze baseline assessments 3. November 2018 - May 2019: monitoring progress of students via in-house assessments 4. April- June 2019: Administer and Analyze MOSL Assessments Administrastion Dates: 9/2018, 12/2018, 3/2019, As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local (New York State) funds such as Fair Student funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, and human resources to implement this action plan from September 2018 through June 2019 as indicated below: Human Resources Positions . Principal . Assistant Principal . Staff Developers (internal and external) . Data Specialist . ESL Coordinator . Teachers 2018-19 CEP 29  vii. March: Measurement; time, weight, space etc. 5/2019 . AIS providers viii. April: Probability ix. May: Number Operations x. June: Fractions All instruction will be aligned to Common Core State Standards and set within curriculum units based upon the NYS Common Core Learning Standards and Aligned to The Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. During daily department-specific Inquiry meetings, pedagogues will review established rubrics and samples of student work. Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. 2. The following programs and/or initiatives will be implemented in order to address items in the Needs Assessment a. Cluster Teachers will teach Mathematics/ELA or Mathematics/ELA-infused lessons For example, the Physical Education teacher will use random Mathematics/ELA lessons/skills as ‘gateway’ work in order for students to retrieve prior knowledge. b. An afterschool targeted Mathematics/ELA professional development program will be developed to provide training in 1.September 2018- October 2018 administer and score 2. November 2018- December 2018: analyze Targets are set and measured as per the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) benchmarks. Any and all progress is also measured through interim assessments . After-school staff . Using Fair Student Funding monies our arts programs provide dance, music, theater, visual arts, and curriculum link with an alignment and concentration in mathematical concept (rhythm, musical notation, etc.) and Social Studies instruction. Non-Human Resources . Supplies: consumable books, paper, writing supplies, mathematics manipulatives, maps, science tools, etc. . Technology: hardware, software, audio-visual equipment (Smart Boards), overhead projectors, etc. As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local (New York State) funds such as Fair Student funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, and human resources to implement this 2018-19 CEP 30  best practices and instructional rigor, as aligned with The Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. c. Guidance Sessions will include Mathematics/ELA instruction d. Transition times between lessons will include verbal Mathematics/ELA problem solving e. Graded assignments will be given using GoMath! f. Common Core Mathematics/ELA websites will be utilized in each classroom using the computers. They may include but are not limited to: given by the city and through school wide and in-class teacher-developed assessments . i. Mathplayground.com ii. Skoolbo.com iii. EngageNewYork.org g. Instructional Software i. Downloadable apps such as Adding Apples for Pre-kindergarten & Kindergarten students ii. Purchased apps h. Entry/exit card math problems distributed at lunchtime and whole-class bathrooming baseline assessments action plan from September 2018 through 3. November 2018 - May 2019: monitoring progress of students via in-house assessments 4. April- June 2019: Administer and Analyze MOSL Assessments June 2019 as indicated below: Human Resources Positions . Principal . Assistant Principal . Staff Developers (internal and external) . Data Specialist . ESL Coordinator . Teachers . AIS providers . After-school staff . Using Fair Student Funding monies our arts programs provide dance, music, theater, visual arts, and curriculum link with an alignment and concentration in mathematical concept (rhythm, musical notation, etc.) and Social Studies instruction. Non-Human Resources . Supplies: consumable books, paper, writing supplies, mathematics 2018-19 CEP 31  manipulatives, maps, science tools, etc. . Technology: hardware, software, audio-visual equipment (Smart Boards), overhead projectors, etc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Every other Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Furthermore, teachers have embedded in their teaching programs a Preparation Period daily. Every six weeks Parents/Caregivers receive a new Progress Report for their child/children which includes academic progress and achievement, social/emotional progress and achievement attendance, uniform wear, book reports, current events, next steps, and parents are notified of the teacher meeting availability periods and encouraged to come to the school to meet with us.Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. Our school Website and FaceBook Page further invites families to collaborate with P.S. 191 keeping our school community up-to-date as to schools happenings: Our School Website: https://sites.google.com/view/ps191paulrobesonschool Our Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/PS191K17/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Mathematics Block – Grade K-5 a. Whole Class b. 75 minutes 2. Mathematics Initiatives- Grades 3-5 a. By class group b. 4 times per week, 45 minutes per day 2018-19 CEP 32  3. At Risk Small Group Mathematics Grades K-5 a. Push-in, Pull-out, small group b. 5 times per week, during school day 4. P.S. 191 After-School Program – New York Junior Tennis League a. Small group tutoring b. 5 times per week, 2.5 hours for grades 1 through 5 5. Mathematics Upper-Grade Academy P.S. 191 Afterschool program 6. English Language Arts Upper-Grade Academy P.S. 191 Afterschool program a. per-session funds used b. additional supplemental curriculum purchased Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, after the second administration and data results analysis of the MOSL Interim Assessments, the students will have increased by 15% from the first MOSL Interim Administration. Benchmark Date Activities: . Weekly homework sheets are sent home with current content area work for parents/care givers to review. Parents and care givers are welcome to contact the school or their child’s teacher for more information. . Monthly progress reports to parents/ caregivers . Monthly parent/ caregiver calendars are sent home detailing important meetings and events for each month. . Parents and care giver are also encouraged to log into SchoolNet in order to monitor their child’s progress on interim assessments throughout the year. Passwords are provided to all parents and care givers. A computer is available for any parent and/or caregiver who wish to access data if they do not have access to the Internet at home. 2018-19 CEP 33  . The school will implement effective small group differentiated learning opportunities, Mathematics skill-based instruction, opportunities for students in grades 3 through 5 inclusive of Special Education and English Language Learners using the components of Balanced Mathematics, Go Math, and My Math. . Three to six small skill ability differentiated groups will be established in each class. Results from the spring 2018, New York State Mathematics examination and the MOSL Interim Assessments will be used to form the groupings. Two to three additional instructors will push into each class. The focus of instruction will be comprehension and writing skills. Content area materials will be used. All instruction will be aligned to Common Core State Standards. The MOSL Interim Assessments are administered four times a school year: September, December, March, and May. In addition, ReadyGen and GoMath unit assessments are administered as per P.S. 191 unit pacing schedule. Furthermore, 'Real-Time' authentic, organic teacher-made assessments and student conferencing assessments conducted weekly. Data garnered from the aforementioned assessments, as well as the NYS Examinations, are utilized to continually review and interpret data, impacting directly lesson planning, student grouping, teaching, and student learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By December 2018, after the second administration and data results analysis of the MOSL Interim Assessments, the students will have increased by 15% from the first MOSL Interim Administration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Professional Development Summary sheets distributed to teachers, as well as teacher observations evaluations review, indicated a desire and need to learn more and/or increase their competency in the four domains of the Danielson Framework, particularly components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Also, teacher professional conversations yielded interest in gaining a better understanding of the new evaluation system, Advance, and how ratings are determined. Additionally, any workshop attended by any staff member requires a Professional Development Summary Sheet to be filled out and a turn-key workshop session scheduled to better serve the needs of the teachers and students. Classroom focus visits, observations review, and teacher feedback during Professional Conversations have yielded the scheduling of differentiated Professional Learning opportunities for teachers. The most recent School Quality Review indicates: We are a Proficient School. The most recent School Quality Guide indicates: We are a school in Good Standing Student Progress: Exceeding Target Student Achievement: Meeting Target Closing the Achievement Gap: Exceeding Target Our School-wide Instructional Focus. Pre-K through Grade Five, is the English Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum-student learning aligned with the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP 35  Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the teachers of P.S. 191 will be members of a Teacher Team to support teacher professional practices to review and analyze school data to support student progress and achievement as it pertains to lesson plan development and multiple entry points for student learning, differentiated, flexible small group instruction to facilitate student engagement and college and career readiness groups. As a new initiative for 2018-2019, all Teacher Assistants will be members of a Teacher Team as well. 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  In-house professional development in the Danielson Framework via SchoolNet and Engage New York during weekly Inquiry Team meetings. By June 2019, all teachers will have additional training on each of the eight Danielson Rubric Competencies which encompass four domains to support our teachers and be instrumental with our instructional goal that 88% of our teachers will be ‘Effective’ as an overall MOTP Rating of Danielson Components assessed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 2. Assistant Principal 3. All Teachers 4. Data Specialist 5. Pupil Accounting Secretary  Engage New York Danielson self-assessments enabling teachers to identify and reflect on their strengths and growth areas. A holistic picture of individual teaching practice, the self-assessment should be used in conjunction with other sources, both formal and informal, including: peer feedback, periodic assessment data, student work, value-added data, etc. Teachers can then 1. September 2018: Training on Advance evaluation system and selection of the Measure of Teacher Performance (MOTP) 2. September 2018- October 2018: Complete initial planning conferences with teachers by October 31, 2018; start conducting observations 3. September 2018- December 2018: Record Local & State Measures for each teacher 4. October 2018- Spring 2109: 2018-19 CEP 37  2. Out of building professional development sessions will be attended by all teachers to ensure complete understanding of how the Danielson Framework is to be utilized as a method of self-reflective practice and teacher evaluation. search for professional development opportunities aligned to a plan. Pedagogical staff attend various, ongoing workshops in the Danielson Framework. The Office of Teacher Effectiveness sponsors the workshops. Participants will explore how to use the Framework to support their own development. Danielson self-assessments enabling teachers to identify and reflect on their strengths and growth areas. A holistic 1. September 2018: Training on Advance evaluation system and selection of the Measure of Teacher Performance (MOTP) picture of individual teaching practice, the self-assessment should be used in conjunction with other sources, both formal and informal, 2. September 2018- October 2018: Complete initial planning conferences with teachers by October 31, 2018; start conducting including: peer feedback, periodic assessment observations 3. September 2018- December As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 2. Assistant Principal 3. All Teachers 4. Data Specialist 5. Pupil Accounting Secretary 2018-19 CEP 38  data, student work, value-added data, etc. Teachers can then search for professional development opportunities aligned to a plan. 2018: Record Local & State Measures for each teacher 4. October 2018- Spring 2019: Pedagogical staff attend various, ongoing workshops in the Danielson Framework. The Office of Teacher Effectiveness sponsors the workshops. Participants will explore how to use the Framework to support their own development. 3. Advance , New York City’s new system of teacher evaluation and development a. Frequent classroom observations paired with timely, meaningful feedback and targeted support to help teachers continuously strengthen their instruction is a central feature of both the NYCDOE’s Citywide Instructional Expectations and Advance . Teachers and administration will a shared understanding of what effective instruction looks like, and a common language with which to discuss it in order to achieve continuous growth in teacher practice. Advance utilizes Charlotte Danielson’s 2013 Framework for Teaching to provide a common language to describe effective teaching practice, and regular, collaborative reviews of student achievement data to focus these conversations on improving student outcomes. b. Job-embedded support for all teachers and administrators. The NYCDOE believes that educators learn best from professional development that is embedded in their everyday work. For teachers, this means learning experiences facilitated by the school leaders who are most knowledgeable about their skills and experiences. School-based learning experiences that engage teachers in professional conversations with their peers .Danielson self-assessments enabling teachers to identify and reflect on their strengths and growth areas. A holistic 1. September 2018: Training on Advance evaluation system and selection of the Measure of Teacher Performance (MOTP) picture of individual teaching practice, the self-assessment should be used in conjunction with other sources, both 2. September 2018- October 2018: Complete initial planning conferences with teachers by October 31, 2018; As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, and present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 2. Assistant Principal 3. All Teachers 4. Data Specialist 5. Pupil Accounting Secretary 2018-19 CEP 39  and administrators about high-quality teaching foster both a professional community and shared learning and support. formal and informal, start conducting observations 3. September 2018- December 2018: Record Local & State Measures for each teacher 4. October 2018- Spring 2019: Pedagogical staff attend various, ongoing workshops in the Danielson Framework. The Office of Teacher Effectiveness sponsors the workshops. Participants will explore how to use the Framework to support their own development. c. Centrally-provided professional development on the teacher practice rubric and core components of Advance . Designed to supplement the job-embedded professional development described above, the NYCDOE has prepared an array of professional development opportunities for teachers and principals to learn more about Advance . These trainings will be conducted outside of schools with a focus on collaborative engagement around Danielson’s Framework for Teaching and its role in conducting fair and accurate assessments of teacher practice providing useful feedback and support to teachers, and other core components of Advance . d. Professional development on rigorous and authentic measures of student learning that are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Beginning in summer 2013, professional development sessions will be offered for teachers and school leaders on the locally-selected including: peer feedback, periodic assessment data, student work, value-added data, etc. Teachers can then search for professional development opportunities aligned to a plan. measures of student learning and the state growth and comparable measures (also known as student learning objectives or SLOs) components of Advance . e. A growing suite of online professional development modules, webinars and resources to support consistent and aligned understandings of Advance . NYCDOE educators can visit EngageNY to explore resources designed to support high-quality professional development experiences for teachers and school leaders, individually or in groups. f. A helpdesk to address inquiries from NYCDOE educators. Teachers and school leaders can email the NYCDOE’s Advance Support help desk with any questions about education law 3012-c or related implementation supports. g. Five school newsletters are produced for informational purposes. The production of the newsletters falls within Domain 4: Professional Responsibilities: 2018-19 CEP 40   Phoenix Rising: The P.S. 191 Monthly Professional Development Newsletter summarizes a professional development experience delivered to a staff member or group of staff members.  The Lab Report: The P.S. 191 Monthly Science Newsletter exposes the reader to the current topics being taught across all grade, links to science education and science content websites (such as NSTA) and other science related experiences and information. Inclusive of this report is a designated section for the CookShop Classroom Initiative. Cookshop Classroom is a federally funded nutrition education program of the Food Bank for New York City which gives students and families the knowledge and skills to make healthy food choices on a limited budget. With interactive workshops engaging approximately 30,000 New Yorkers across all five boroughs, and social marketing targeting more than 125,000 youth, CookShop teaches cooking skills and nutrition information, and fosters enthusiasm for fresh, affordable fruit, vegetables, legumes and whole grains.  The Physical Education Newsletter: The P.S. 191 Monthly Physical Education Newsletter details the in-house sports and physical education experiences, information on physical fitness and exercise, and other socio-culturally relevant material. This report features 3 sections: Section I: Physical Education sports, experiences, physical fitness and exercise Section II: CookShop Classroom Initiative. Cookshop Classroom is a federally funded nutrition education program of the Food Bank for New York City which gives students and families the knowledge and skills to make healthy food choices on a limited budget. With interactive workshops engaging approximately 30,000 New Yorkers across all five boroughs, and social marketing targeting more than 125,000 youth, CookShop teaches cooking skills and nutrition information, and fosters enthusiasm for fresh, affordable fruit, vegetables, legumes and whole grains.  Section III: Skoolbo Mathematics Initiative. Skoolbo consists of a team of educators and developers spanning the globe that is committed to creating accessible learning solutions. Skoolbo’s dream is that every child learns to read and gains confidence with 2018-19 CEP 41 numbers with the belief that technology can dramatically assist with this goal.  Pre-Kindergarten Bilingual Newsletter: The P.S. 191 Monthly Pre-Kindergarten bilingual newsletter is an instrument of information for our families of the happenings of the month in the Pre-Kindergarten classroom, such as; academic snap-shot, skills learned, thematic unit, upcoming educational opportunities trips, and request for parent volunteers.  English as a New Language (ENL) Quadrilingual Newsletter: The P.S. 191 Monthly English as a New Language Quadrilingual Newsletter is an instrument of information for our families of the academic and social happenings of the month in all classrooms with registered ENL students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Every other Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Furthermore, teachers have embedded in their teaching programs a Preparation Period daily. Every six weeks Parents/Caregivers receive a new Progress Report for their child/children which includes academic progress and achievement, social/emotional progress and achievement attendance, uniform wear, book reports, current events, next steps, and parents are notified of the teacher meeting availability periods and encouraged to come to the school to meet with us.Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. 2018-19 CEP 42  Our school website further invites families to collaborate with P.S. 191 keeping our school community up-to-date as to schools happenings: https://sites.google.com/view/ ps191paulrobesonschool Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Weekly Grade Leader Inquiry Team Meetings a. Held each Monday 2. Weekly Department Inquiry Team Meetings: Common planning and professional development time a. Tuesdays/ELA Team Teacher Meeting – Grades Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, 1 and 2. b. Wednesdays/Math Science Teacher Team Meeting – Grades 3, 4 and 5. c. Thursdays/Ell Special Education Team Teacher Meeting – All Grades. 3. Out of building workshops in the Danielson Framework sponsored by the Office of Teacher Effectiveness 4. Digital photography is used for the school newsletters 5. a. Per-session funds used for Professional Learning opportunities b. Professional Development funds will be used for presenters and resources b. Additional supplemental readings will be purchased Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 43  Continuous efforts are delineated below to comply with Chancellor Regulation A-210. Daily, weekly, and monthly monitoring, analysis, and strategies adjustment (as deemed necessary) and implementation will ensure continuous student attendance growth. Mid-year, February 2019, the PTA Executive Board, School Leadership Team, Student Leadership Team, and the Administration of P.S. 191 will meet to review, analyze, and discuss the above and below noted attendance strategies to support Chancellor Regulation A-210 compliance and above. The ability of families to participate in their child's learning varies widely because of other family or job obligations. It is the responsibility of teachers to provide opportunities for families to understand both the instructional program and their child's progress. Teachers establish relationships with families by communicating to them about: . the instructional program . conferring with them about individual students . inviting them to be part of the educational process itself Additional focus will be placed on the following in accordance with Danielson Domain 4: Professional Responsibilities . The importance of regular communication with families cannot be overstated. . A teacher's effort to communicate with families conveys the teacher's essential caring, valued by families of students of all ages. . Teachers will frequently provide information to families about the instructional program. . Teachers will frequently provide information to families about students' individual progress. . Teachers will provide a comprehensive monthly progress report to parents/ caregivers delegating academic levels in the four content areas, social/ emotional progress/ attendance, book reports/ current events assignments update, and uniform wear. . The teacher frequently and successfully offers engagement opportunities to families so that they can participate in the learning activities. . Teachers will communicate frequently with families in a culturally sensitive manner, with students contributing to the communication as appropriate. . The teacher responds to family concerns with professional and cultural sensitivity. . The teacher's efforts to engage families in the instructional program are frequent and successful. 2018-19 CEP 44  . Daily, teacher preparation periods top meet with families . Weekly, Parent Engagement Tuesdays to meet with families . Monthly Student Progress Reports sent home . Attendance continuously reviewed by classroom teacher . Attendance continuously reviewed by School Family Worker/designated School Aide with home visits made as necessary . Attendance continuously reviewed by Pupil Accounting Secretary The MOSL Interim Assessments are administered four times a school year: September, December, March, and May. In addition, ReadyGen and GoMath unit assessments are administered as per P.S. 191 unit pacing schedule. Furthermore, 'Real-Time' authentic, organic teacher-made assessments and student conferencing assessments conducted weekly. Data garnered from the aforementioned assessments, as well as the NYS Examinations, are utilized to continually review and interpret data, impacting directly professional development, lesson planning, student grouping, teaching, and student learning. Classroom focus visits, observations review, and teacher feedback during Professional Conversations have yielded the scheduling of differentiated Professional Learning opportunities for teachers. Professional Conversations occur continuously throughout the school year, such as, during: IPCs, before and/or after observations, before and/or after instructional focus walks, Professional Development Mondays, Administration scheduled conferences, and teacher requested conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Continuous efforts by the School Attendance Improvement Team, are delineated above to comply with Chancellor Regulation A-210. Daily, weekly, and monthly monitoring, analysis, and strategies adjustment (as deemed necessary) and implementation will ensure continuous student attendance growth. The School Attendance Improvement Team meets daily. School Attendance Improvement Team Members: Principal Assistant Principal Pupil Accounting Secretary School Family Worker School Parent Coordinator Family Liaison School Aide . Attendance continuously reviewed by classroom teacher . Attendance continuously reviewed by School Family Worker/designated School Aide and home-visits made as 2018-19 CEP 45  necessary . Attendance continuously reviewed by Pupil Accounting Secretary Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Continuous efforts are delineated below to comply with Chancellor Regulation A-210. Previous efforts to increase student attendance have proved effective on a month to month bases compliant with Chancellor’s Regulation A-210. Strategies include student attendance tracking, home phone calls, home letters, and home visits. The most recent School Quality Review indicates: We are a Proficient School. The most recent School Quality Guide indicates: We are a school in Good Standing Student Progress: Exceeding Target Student Achievement: Meeting Target Closing the Achievement Gap: Exceeding Target Our School-wide Instructional Focus. Pre-K through Grade Five, is the English Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum-student learning aligned with the CCLS. . Students who do not meet compliance with Chancellor's Regulation A-210 are identified, assigned a staff member for tracking, tracked daily, and home outreach via phone, letters, home visits is conducted. Chancellor's Regulation Compliance Attendance Charts are updated monthly. . Weekly Attendance Committee Meeting with the Attendance Teacher Officer . Daily Attendance Committee Meeting as part of the Be-Nice/PPC/SSST Meeting: 8:45 a.m., Room 201 . Daily review of attendance . Home Phone Calls 2018-19 CEP 47  . Home letters . Home Visits . Parent Involvement Tuesdays . Four, specific dated, Parent Conferences yearly . Parent meetings as needed and requested by staff and/or parents/guardians . Regularly scheduled PTA open-membership meeting . Daily availability to meet with parents/guardians . Attendance continuously reviewed by classroom teacher . Attendance continuously reviewed by School Family Worker/designated School Aide . Attendance continuously reviewed by Pupil Accounting Secretary Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will collaboratively review and analyze with teachers, paraprofessionals, and support staff the following, with 100% participation with the expectation of actionable and meaningful feedback and next steps through data-based decision making to support student academic and social/emotional progress and achievement. Lesson-plan development (with ‘Next-Generation’ Curriculum in mind)  UDL (Universal Design Learning) Concepts and Implementation  Data-Wise Initiative and Implementation   Real-Time Assessments results  MOSL results   Student work samples Student data-driven multiple entry points for learning, differentiated, and flexible grouping student clusters 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The following interventions and activities will be implemented beginning September, 2017: . Staff-maintained journals citing student attendance as well as other student matters and concerns. . Monthly progress reports dent to parents/ caregivers includes attendance students’ monthly attendance . Monitoring of daily student attendance rates by class and individual students. . Regularly distributed attendance incentives. . Publicized attendance assembly celebrations. . Implementation and monitoring of the P.S. 191 Attendance Plan. . Logged telephone calls in main office journals and outside of Principal’s office. . Calls will be made for regular school day and After-School Tutorial Program non-attendance or lateness. . The Family Workers and the Parent Coordinator will expedite home visits. . Communication with the St. John’s Shelter will continue to be ongoing and timely. . Daily display of class attendance rates by means of a bulletin board outside of the Principal’s office. . Public Address system announcements to praise high attendance rates for classes and individual students. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, and present the initiatives in this plan: Principal . Assistant Principal . Classroom Teachers . Family Workers . Parent Coordinator . Pupil Accounting Secretary . Data Specialist . Monitoring of daily and monthly student attendance rates by class and individual students. Individual students are accompanied to the attendance charts and filled out by the student with their Attendance Sponsor. . Monthly rates of attendance are monitored by class. Classes that show a downward trend in attendance are then assessed for further investigation into possible causes for 1.September 2018: Students with attendance issues are identified and distributed to the Attendance Sponsors for daily tracking. 2. September 2018 – October 2018: As the student registers normalize (no-shows, transfers, and newly-admitted students are identified) adjusted attendance rates are evaluated. 3. October 2018– June 2019: Teachers 2018-19 CEP 49  . Daily student attendance is monitored using a template, which is part of an office display. As these huge at-a-glance monthly displays are “retired,” they are posted on nearby walls so that parents, children and staff can visually compare one month’s student attendance rate by class to that of the prior or upcoming month. . A 4’x 3’ weekly banner is awarded to one Upper Grade class and one Early Childhood class with the most days in one week with 100% attendance. The banner is then displayed either inside the room or in the hallway outside of the room. . Daily “100% Attendance” sign is awarded to classes that have perfect attendance for any given day. The sign is posted on the the trend. The Attendance Committee then takes steps to correct and/or improve the identified attendance matters. classroom door. . Attendance Incentives determine any absenteeism patterns by students. Transfer students from other NYCDOE schools will have their attendance patterns evaluated through SchoolNet. 4. September 2018- June 2019: Student attendance is charted in the Main Office. Students are brought into the office to identify their attendance patterns and rate. 5. September 2018- June 2019: Daily student attendance is announced on the Public Address system to encourage improved attendance. 2018-19 CEP 50  An attendance banner is awarded to the class with the highest attendance rate from the previous week. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Coordinated by our Parent Coordinator. Every other Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club, hosted by our Parent Coordinator, utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Furthermore, teachers have embedded in their teaching programs a Preparation Period daily. Every six weeks Parents/Caregivers receive a new Progress Report for their child/children which includes academic progress and achievement, social/emotional progress and achievement attendance, uniform wear, book reports, current events, next steps, and parents are notified of the teacher meeting availability periods and encouraged to come to the school to meet with us. Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 51  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will maintain ongoing communication and dialogue with the St. John’s Shelter or any other facility that houses Students in Temporary Housing (STH). .The Pupil Accounting Secretary and the Data Specialist will regularly deliver information with regards to any students who are in danger of not meeting the minimum attendance threshold needed as part of promotional criteria. . The BFSC Attendance Teacher will regularly meet with school personnel and the Pupil Accounting Secretary in order to ascertain the need for U.S. Post Office Postal Service traces and/or home visitations. . Local services such as the Mayor’s Inter-agency Task Force on Truancy, Chronic Absenteeism & School Engagement will be utilized as well. . Title I funds will continue to be allocated for Students in Temporary Housing to purchase school supplies and uniforms. . As stated previously: . Monitoring of daily and monthly student attendance rates by class and individual students. Individual students are accompanied to the attendance charts and filled out by the student with their Attendance Sponsor and monthly rates of attendance are monitored by class. Classes that show a downward trend in attendance are then assessed for further investigation into possible causes for the trend. The Attendance Committee then takes steps to correct and/or improve the identified attendance matters. . Implementation and monitoring of the P.S. 191 Attendance Plan. . Logged telephone calls in main office journals and outside of Principal’s office. . Calls will be made for regular school day and After-School Tutorial Programs non-attendance Teacher per session Supervisor per session Curriculum and Supplemental Curriculum: ReadyGen, GoMath!, Fundations, Wonders, MY Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In alignment with the School/Parent Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy (see below) parents will be kept aware of ongoing monitoring of student attendance. 2018-19 CEP 52  Mid-year, February 2019, the SLT, Teaching Teams, and the Administration of P.S. 191 will meet to review, analyze, discuss, and revise, as necessary, the above. The School Attendance Improvement Team meets daily. School Attendance Improvement Team Members: Principal Assistant Principal Pupil Accounting Secretary School Family Worker School Parent Coordinator Family Liaison School Aide The homes of chronically absentee students will be visited by the Family Workers to ascertain reasons for absences and to speak to parents regarding student’s daily school attendance. Telephone calls will be made daily and logged. . The New York Junior Tennis League After-School Program at P.S. 191 serves to motivate students to maintain high attendance rates. This program meets five days per week from 2:20 pm to 5:30 pm. The program staff remains in the school until 6:00 pm to discuss student matters, inclusive of any attendance related problems. The following resources are available for parents and caregivers who require clarity or information regarding their child’s attendance: . The P.S. 191 Attendance Plan; . Chancellor’s Regulation A-210: Minimum Standards for Attendance Programs; . Chancellor’s Regulation A-510: Promotion Standards . Review, compliance, and expectation to exceed minimum attendance regulations as delineated in Chancellor's Regulation A-210. Students identified as being chronically absent will be monitored during advisory. Each student will be mentored by a staff member to ensure all hindrance which prevents them from attending are addressed and resolved. . Students who do not meet compliance with Chancellor's Regulation A-210 are delineated, assigned a staff member for tracking, tracked daily, and home outreach via phone, letters, home visits is conducted. Chancellor's Regulation Compliance Attendance Charts are updated monthly. 2018-19 CEP 53  . Weekly Attendance Committee Meeting with Mr. Kenneth Williams, Attendance Teacher Officer . Daily Attendance Committee Meeting as part of the Be-Nice/PPC/SSST Meeting: 8:45 a.m., Room 201 . Daily review of attendance . Home Phone Calls . Home letters . Home Visits . Parent Involvement Tuesdays . Four, specific dated, Parent Conferences yearly . Parent meetings as needed and requested by staff and/or parents/guardians . Regularly scheduled PTA open-membership meeting . Daily availability to meet with parents/guardians . Attendance continuously reviewed by classroom teacher . Attendance continuously reviewed by School Family Worker/designated School Aide . Attendance continuously reviewed by Pupil Accounting Secretary Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By June 2019 for the 2018-2019 school year, through strengthening communication with the parent community, P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Every other Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. Parent Surveys will be disseminated and reviewed to accord our families for an additional family-voice and support. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 54  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Needs Assessment Data: o Officer vacancies within the PTA (zero vacancies are desired) o Parent/caregiver attendance for PTA meetings o Parent/caregiver attendance for Parent/Teacher Conferences o Parent response rate to the NYCDOE Annual School Survey The most recent School Quality Review indicates: We are a Proficient School. The most recent School Quality Guide indicates: We are a school in Good Standing Student Progress: Exceeding Target Student Achievement: Meeting Target Closing the Achievement Gap: Exceeding Target Our School-wide Instructional Focus. Pre-K through Grade Five, is the English Language Arts and Mathematics Curriculum-student learning aligned with the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP 55  Referencing the Framework for Great Schools, P.S. 191 has seen progress with Trust, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, and Collaborative Teachers. Our goal is continued rigorous instruction, manifested through Danielson Rubric indicators 3b, 3c, and 3d, to support student achievement. In June 2018, 87.00% (up from 85.7% in June 2016) of teachers received an overall MOTP Rating of at-least ‘Effective’ on the eight Danielson Rubric Competencies assessed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric as entered into the NYCDOE Advance Observation Tool Computer Program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through strengthening communication with the parent/caregiver community and working collaboratively with our community and Parent Coordinator, we will implement Parent/Caregiver Engagement Tuesdays, Parent/Caregiver Engagement Workshops, Parent-Caregiver/Students collaborative events, Parent/Caregiver Tours, and a Parent Book Club. We will establish, strengthen, and support community partnerships and relationships to facilitate trust and involvement to with school-wide projects and initiatives with a goal of at least 50% family involvement. And increase each year. We moved our Principal's office (124) and our Main Office (121) to the first floor to allow for ADA compliant, equal, and barrier-free access to all members of our school-community and boarder community-partnerships. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. A Monthly Parent Calendar will inform parents of upcoming events and meetings well in advance of the scheduled date. 2. The Annual Lower Grade Parent/caregivers Appreciation Breakfast 3. The Annual Upper Grade Parent/caregivers Appreciation Breakfast 4. The Annual Parent/ caregivers Appreciation Barbeque Attendance and participation rates at the following parent events: o Monthly parent/caregivers workshops conducted by classroom teachers, AIS providers and the administration will guide parents 5. Monthly parent/caregiver workshops conducted by classroom teachers, AIS providers and the administration will guide parents through curricular concerns. through curricular concerns. o Workshops for parents/caregiver conducted by the Guidance Counselor and the Parent Coordinator o Workshops for parents/caregiver will feature Guest Speakers when applicable. o Attendance rates at PAC/PTA monthly meetings will be monitored. 1. September 2018: Vacancies within the PTA Executive Board are identified and special elections are held if necessary 2. September 2018 – June 2019: Workshops for parents are held throughout the academic year during the school day and afterschool as necessary. 3. Spring 2019: Parent surveys are distributed and collected during the Parent/Teacher Conferences As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, and present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 2. Assistant Principal (TBD) 3. Parent Coordinator 4. Teachers 5. Family Worker 6. Guidance Counselor 7. School Psychologist 8. Selected Paraprofessionals 9. Data Specialist 10.AIS Teachers 2018-19 CEP 57  o Every Tuesday afternoon parents/caregivers may meet with their child’s teacher. Every teacher has a preparation period every school day, which parents/caregivers may schedule to meet with their child’s teacher. . Zero vacancies within the PTA Executive Board 6. Workshops for parents/caregiver conducted by the Guidance Counselor and the Parent Coordinator will guide parents through concerns related to topics ranging from social issues to outreach to community resources and Community Based Organizations. 7. Workshops for parents/caregiver will feature Guest Speakers when applicable. 8. The K-5 Lending Library for parents will enable them to assist their children in raising guided reading levels and homework completion. 9. Attendance rates at PAC/PTA monthly meetings will be monitored. 10. School Leadership Team Meetings will focus on greater parental engagement in the decision-making processes affecting instruction and conceptual consolidation. . Attendance rates at the following parent events: o Monthly parent/caregivers workshops conducted by classroom teachers, AIS providers and the administration will guide parents through curricular concerns. o Workshops for parents/caregiver conducted by the Guidance Counselor and the Parent Coordinator 1. September 2018: Vacancies within the PTA Executive Board are identified and special elections are held if necessary 2. September 2018 – June 2019: Workshops for parents are held throughout the academic year during the school day and afterschool as necessary. o Workshops for parents/caregiver will feature Guest 3. Spring 2019: Parent surveys As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, and present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 2. Assistant Principal (TBD) 3. Parent Coordinator 4. Teachers 5. Family Worker 6. Guidance Counselor 7. School Psychologist 2018-19 CEP 58  are distributed and collected during the Parent/Teacher Conferences 8. Selected Paraprofessionals 9. Data Specialist 10.AIS Teachers Speakers when applicable. o Attendance rates at PAC/PTA monthly meetings will be monitored. o Every Tuesday afternoon parents/caregivers may meet with their child’s teacher. Every teacher has a preparation period every school day, which parents/caregivers may schedule to meet with their child’s teacher. . Zero vacancies within the PTA Executive Board 11. P.S. 191 has a daily attendance meeting at 8:30 a.m. In addition P.S. 191 Case Study Meetings for Chronically Absent students will serve as indicators of absenteeism and lateness by the Pupil Personnel Committee/Student Support Services Team (“Be Nice”) Committee, which meets daily. Attendees: Principal Assistant Principal Pupil Accounting Secretary School Family Worker School Parent Coordinator Attendance rates at the following parent events: o Monthly parent/caregivers workshops conducted by classroom teachers, AIS providers and the administration will guide parents through curricular concerns. o Workshops for parents/caregiver conducted by the Guidance 1. September 2018: Vacancies within the PTA Executive Board are identified and special elections are held if necessary 2. September 2018 – June 2019: Workshops for parents are held throughout the academic year during the As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, and present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 2. Assistant Principal (TBD) 3. Parent Coordinator 4. Teachers 5. Family Worker 2018-19 CEP 59 school day and afterschool as 6. Guidance Counselor necessary. 7. School Psychologist 3. Spring 2019: Parent surveys are distributed and collected during the Parent/Teacher Conferences 8. Selected Paraprofessionals 9. Data Specialist 10.AIS Teachers Family Liaison School Aide  These meetings give all staff members the opportunity to discuss student matters, best practices, and concerns. You can also present evidence of your interventions with your students including one-to-one support. All staff members are invited to attend. If you would like to participate in an Attendance Meeting and/or SSST/PPC session/s please inform the school secretary who will arrange coverage for your class so you may attend. 12. The homes of chronically absentee students will be visited by the Family Worker to ascertain reasons for absences and to speak to parents regarding student’s daily school attendance. Telephone calls will be made daily and logged. 13. Each staff member maintains a dedicated and labeled composition notebook detailing student absenteeism and other related concerns. These 30 log books are monitored by the Principal and Assistant Principal. 14. The Title I Parent Involvement Policy will be reviewed/revised with the PTA Executive Board and shared with the parent body. The role of the Parent Advisory Council Chairperson will be reviewed, explained and complied with. Counselor and the Parent Coordinator o Workshops for parents/caregiver will feature Guest Speakers when applicable. o Attendance rates at PAC/PTA monthly meetings will be monitored. o Every Tuesday afternoon parents/caregivers may meet with their child’s teacher. Every teacher has a preparation period every school day, which parents/caregivers may schedule to meet with their child’s teacher. . Zero vacancies within the PTA Executive Board 15. The School-Parent Compact will be reviewed/revised with the PTA Executive Board and shared with the parent body. Attendance rates at the following parent events: 16. The roles of the PTA Executive Board members will be reviewed and complied with. 17. We are a ‘School in Good Standing’. A workshop will be devoted to explanation of the AYP (Adequate Yearly Progress) of a school as a means of measuring whether our school is making satisfactory progress toward meeting the New York State proficiency level for all students in ELA, Mathematics, and o Monthly parent/caregivers workshops conducted by classroom teachers, AIS providers and the administration will guide parents As a team, the following staff members will plan, prepare, and present the initiatives in this plan: 1. Principal 1. September 2018: Vacancies within the PTA Executive Board are identified and special elections are held if necessary 2. September 2018 – June 2019: 2018-19 CEP 60 Workshops for parents are held throughout the academic year during the school day and afterschool as necessary. 3. Spring 2018: Parent surveys are distributed and collected during the Parent/Teacher Conferences 2. Assistant Principal (TBD) 3. Parent Coordinator 4. Teachers 5. Family Worker 6. Guidance Counselor 7. School Psychologist 8. Selected Paraprofessionals 9. Data Specialist 10.AIS Teachers Science by the 2017-2018 academic school year as per the ESSA. through curricular concerns. 18. Every Tuesday afternoon parents/caregivers may meet with their child’s teacher from 2:20pm to 3:00pm. Every teacher has a preparation period every school day which parents/caregivers may schedule to meet with their child’s teacher. o Workshops for parents/caregiver conducted by the Guidance Counselor and the Parent Coordinator o Workshops for parents/caregiver will feature Guest Speakers when applicable. o Attendance rates at PAC/PTA monthly meetings will be monitored. o Every Tuesday afternoon parents/caregivers may meet with their child’s teacher. Every teacher has a preparation period every school day, which parents/caregivers may schedule to meet with their child’s teacher. . Zero vacancies within the PTA Executive Board. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Every other 2018-19 CEP 61  Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Furthermore, teachers have embedded in their teaching programs a Preparation Period daily. Every six weeks Parents/Caregivers receive a new Progress Report for their child/children which includes academic progress and achievement, social/emotional progress and achievement attendance, uniform wear, book reports, current events, next steps, and parents are notified of the teacher meeting availability periods and encouraged to come to the school to meet with us.Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. Our Partnerships/CBOs:  METS Foundation: Uniforms, Book Bags, and School Supplies  NYJTL: After-School Program  Borough President Office: 30 Laptops in each Classroom, 51 Computer Desktops for Computer Laboratory, STEAM Mobile Labs, STEAM Classroom, New Library  City Council Office: Dance Art Program  Office of Mental Health: Staff and Parent Workshops  Victory Dance: Dance Program and Prospective New After-School Program  NYPD: Safety Lessons for Students   Con Edison: Electricity Conservation  OSYD: Restorative-Schools Series on School Site  Mighty Milers: Physical Education Fitness Program  Cook Shop: Healthily Habits for Students and Families FDNY: Fire and Smoke Safety/Smoke House on Wheels NY Cares: School-Wide Murals Our School Website: https://sites.google.com/view/ps191paulrobesonschool Our Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/PS191K17/ Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Workshops for parents are held throughout the academic year during the school day and afterschool as necessary. Topics may include parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home 2. Parent surveys are distributed and collected during the Parent/Teacher Conferences 3. Translation Services as required: Spanish, Arabic and Haitian Creole are currently the three most commonly required languages for translation. 2018-19 CEP 62  4. PTA/PAC/School Funds inclusive of Per-session funds will be used as available and necessary to facilitate parent involvement. 5. Teacher per session 6. Supervisor per session 7. Curriculum and Supplemental Curriculum: ReadyGen, GoMath!, Fundations, Wonders, MY Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To further clarify, this goal would ensure that the school and parents/ caregivers work cooperatively to provide for the successful education of our children. This goal would serve to develop the capacity of parents/ guardians and the school's capacity for strong parental involvement through the effective involvement of parents/ guardians and to additionally support a partnership amongst the school, parents and the community to improve student academic achievement. This goal will enable parents to learn how to play an integral role in assisting their child's learning as per ESSA and parents on the Executive Board will be full partners in their children's education and as such, will be included in decision making and on advisory committees, where appropriate. By extension, this will benefit the entire school community, parental and pedagogical. Mid-year, February 2019, the PTA Executive Board, School Leadership Team, and the Administration of P.S. 191 will meet to review, analyze, discuss, and revise, as necessary, the above. In June 2018, 100% of teachers received an overall MOTP Rating of at-least ‘Effective’ on the eight Danielson Rubric Competencies assessed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric as entered into the NYCDOE Advance Observation Tool Computer Program. P.S. 191 Features a Parent/Caregiver Open-House every Tuesday afternoon. Families are given a tour of the building with a narrative and a Question/Answer session. Special and specific visits are welcomed and granted. Every other Tuesday P.S. 191 offers a Common Core Workshop for Parents/Caregivers Session. On the alternate Tuesdays P.S. 191 offers a Parents/Caregivers Book Club utilizing such books as: . Parents Do Make a Difference by Michele Borba, Mindset by Carol S. Dweck, and the 8th Habit by Stephen R. Covey. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend Weekly School Open-Houses, Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings, The Four City-wide School Conferences, Complete School Surveys, Complete NYCDOE Surveys, and visit their child/children's classroom/s. Furthermore, teachers have embedded in their teaching programs a Preparation Period daily. Every six weeks Parents/Caregivers 2018-19 CEP 63  receive a new Progress Report for their child/children which includes academic progress and achievement, social/emotional progress and achievement attendance, uniform wear, book reports, current events, next steps, and parents are notified of the teacher meeting availability periods and encouraged to come to the school to meet with us.Families are always welcome as our stakeholders and partners. Our Community-Based Organizations Partnerships: NYJTL Mighty Milers CookShop Victory Dance Brownsville Community Center (They will donate bookbags to our students in temporary housing (33% of our student-body) FDNY NYPD Con Edison NY Cares Additional Features: 1. A Monthly Parent Calendar will inform parents of upcoming events and meetings well in advance of the scheduled date. 2. The Annual Lower Grade Parent/guardians Appreciation Breakfast 3. The Annual Upper Grade Parent/guardians Appreciation Breakfast 4. Monthly parent/caregiver workshops conducted by classroom teachers, AIS/RTI providers and the administration will guide parents through curricular concerns. 5 . We are a ‘School in Good Standing’. A workshop will be devoted to explanation of the AYP (Adequate Yearly Progress) of a school as a means of measuring whether our school is making satisfactory progress toward meeting the New York State proficiency level for all students in ELA, Mathematics, and Science. 2018-19 CEP 64  6. Every Tuesday afternoon parents/guardians may meet with their child’s teacher from 2:20pm to 3:00pm. Every teacher has a preparation period every school day which parents/caregivers may schedule to meet with their child’s teacher. 7. Teachers have daily preparation periods to meet with parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-year, February 2019, the PTA Executive Board, School Leadership Team, and the Administration of P.S. 191 will meet to review, analyze, and discuss the above and below noted parent/guardian involvement strategies to support parent involvement in anticipation of meeting our annual goal, of a greater completion percentage of Parent Surveys. Parent involvement sign-in sheets data will be reviewed for school-wide activities, grade activities, and class-specific involvements. Parent Surveys will be disseminated and reviewed to accord our families for an additional family-voice and support. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 65  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) . Literacy Initiatives- Grades 3-5 By class group . 5 times per week, 45 minutes . Guided Reading Small Groups - Grades K-5, school-wide . Push-in, small group o Push-in & Pull-out, small group per day . 5 times per week, during . Small group tutoring school day o At-Risk Small Group Literacy -Grades K-5 . P.S. 191 After-School Program – New York Junior Tennis League (NYJTL) . ELA and Mathematics Upper House Academy P.S. 191 Afterschool Program o 5 times per week, during school day. . 5 times per week, 3.5 hours for grades K through 5 Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) There are two ways a student becomes eligible for AIS - One way is when a student does not pass an elementary level New York City and/or New York State assessment ELA. Not passing means that the student has not meet the city and or state designated performance level. - The second way is when the school determines that the student is at risk of not meeting New York City and/ or New York State standards. All students who score at levels 1 and 2 must receive academic intervention services. The services for each particular student will vary based on the student’s academic and social/emotional needs measured by city/state 2018-19 CEP 66  Mathematics Science assessments and other data of the student’s school performance. There are two ways a student becomes eligible for AIS - One way is when a student does not pass an elementary level New York City and/or New York State assessment Mathematics. Not passing means that the student has not meet the city and or state designated performance level. - The second way is when the school determines that the student is at risk of not meeting New York City and/ or New York State standards. All students who score at levels 1 and 2 must receive academic intervention services. The services for each particular student will vary based on the student’s academic and social/emotional needs measured by city/state assessments and other data of the student’s school performance. There are two ways a student becomes eligible for AIS . For 50 min. during school day, 5 days/week, 5 days/week . 4 days/week for 50 minutes during school day; 2 days/week for 100 minutes during school day and 2 days/week for 50 minutes during school day. . Grades 2 and 4 – 5 days/week . Small group . Small group for 50 min. during school day . 5 Grade 3 – 4 days/week for 50 minutes during school day, Grade 5 – 2 days/week for 100 minutes during school day and 2 days/week for 50 minutes during school day. . P.S. 191 After-School Program – New York Junior Tennis League (NYJTL) . ELA and Mathematics Upper House Academy P.S. 191 Afterschool Program . Grades 4 hands-on test . Small Group . Small Group . 4 days/week for 50 min. during preparation initiative school day. 2018-19 CEP 67  Social Studies - One way is when a student does not pass an elementary level New York City and/or New York State assessment Science. Not passing means that the student has not meet the city and or state designated performance level. - The second way is when the school determines that the student is at risk of not meeting New York City and/ or New York State standards. All students who score at levels 1 and 2 must receive academic intervention services. The services for each particular student will vary based on the student’s academic and social/emotional needs measured by city/state assessments and other data of the student’s school performance. There are two ways a student becomes eligible for AIS - One way is when a student does not pass an elementary level New York City and/or New York State assessment Social Studies. Not passing means that the student has not meet the city and or . Science Literacy . Small Group o After school tutorial o 5 times per week, 3.5 hours for grades K through 5 . Grade 4; 5 – instruction during school day to focus on key . Small group . Small group . Small group . 2 days/week for 45 min. . 4 days/week for 50 min. during concepts, interpretation of data and writing responses to . Small group school day. . 5 times per week, 3.5 hours for grades K through 5 2018-19 CEP 68  state designated performance level. document based questions. - The second way is when the school determines that the student is at risk of not meeting New York City and/ or New York State standards. All students who score at levels 1 and 2 must receive academic intervention services. The services for each particular student will vary based on the student’s academic and social/emotional needs measured by city/state assessments and other data of the student’s school performance. All students who score at levels 1 and 2 must receive academic intervention services. The services for each particular student will vary based on the student’s academic and social/emotional needs measured by city/state assessments and other data of the student’s school performance. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) . 5 Grades 3-5 test preparation initiative o Social Studies Skills and Literacy instruction during for Grades 3-5 . After school tutorial . Guidance At-risk Counseling . School Psychologist At-risk counseling . School Social Worker At-risk counseling . At-Risk Health Services: Open Airways Asthma Program; . One-to-one and small Ongoing during the school Groups day . One-to-one; during the . Small group counseling school day consists of Grievance . One-to-one; during the Counseling, Character school day . Nurse, school aids and service providers Development, Respect for All- Dignity Act, and Conflict Vision and Hearing Tests; . Small Group academic Resolution. P.S. 191 Celebrant Program emphasizing 2018-19 CEP 69  Speech Related Services; Occupational Instruction and one-to-one monitoring of students’ services academic and social Therapy; Physical Therapy . Small Group academic performance through staff and . SETSS Teacher, academic Instruction and one-to-one student special activities intervention services services involvement. . Response to Intervention (RTI) . P.S. 191 Celebrant Program emphasizing monitoring of students’ academic and social performance though staff and student special activities involvement. Teacher Consultations regarding students . P.S. 191 Celebrant Program emphasizing monitoring of students’ academic and social performance though staff and student special activities involvement 2018-19 CEP 70  . Attendance monitoring 2018-19 CEP 71  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 33 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Uniforms, School Supplies, Book Bags, Books, Counseling Services, AIS, RTI, After-School Achievement Academy Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 72  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 73  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Although all of the staff is currently Highly Qualified as defined by ESSA we will continue to send various members of the staff to available professional development opportunities, set up teacher teams for collaborative practices, and provide in-house workshops covering a variety of topics as evidenced by our Professional Development calendars, agendas, and sign-in sheets. To fill unforeseen vacancies and maintain 100% Highly Qualified Teachers, P.S. 191 has an informal hiring committee, comprised of members from the school administration, teaching staff and specialists/coaches. The informal hiring committee reviews resumes, its members meet to formulate a list of needs, and they attend hiring fairs/events held in New York City. Through the informal hiring committee, P.S. 191 reaches out to qualified teachers, interviews promising candidates, and schedules potential hires to visit the school. The hiring committee conducts strategic interviewing throughout the year. To address the issue concerning the retention of Highly Qualified Teachers, we will use funds (through conceptual consolidation) to maintain lower class size on all grades and AIS push in for all grades. In this manner, we attempt to decrease the student teacher ratio, in particular, that of the students in the subgroups who are at-risk, ELL or underperforming based on academic assessments. Staff members providing AIS services will model best practices and push-in during literacy and mathematic instruction blocks to reduce class size and service at-risk students. Administrators and grade leaders will work to achieve the following tasks: . foster collaboration among teachers and consultants; . weekly planning meeting/common prep period by academic instruction category for all teachers; . intra-grade, inter-grade, and inter-school visitations; . provide opportunities for teachers and paraprofessionals to attend a variety of workshops; . training on data collection facilitated by the Data Specialists; 2018-19 CEP 74  . analysis and review and use to adjust instruction 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is provided throughout the academic year on a variety of topics. They include, but are not limited to, the following: . Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric . Advance-Teacher Evaluation Tool . The four A’s of Article and Document Review . Utilizing data resources to identify student needs . Common Core Instructional Shifts . Unit Planning for the Common Core Shifts . Writing Instructional Goals . Classroom Management Professional Development Summary sheets distributed to teachers, as well as teacher observations evaluations review, indicated a desire and need to learn more and/or increase their competency in the four domains of the Danielson Framework, particularly components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Also, teacher professional conversations yielded interest in gaining a better understanding of the new evaluation system, Advance, and how ratings are determined. Additionally, any workshop attended by any staff member requires a Professional Development Summary Sheet to be filled out and a turn-key workshop session scheduled to better serve the needs of the teachers and students. Classroom focus visits, observations review, and teacher feedback during Professional Conversations have yielded the scheduling of differentiated Professional Learning opportunities for teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 75  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Kindergarten and Pre-Kindergarten teachers meet with all parents and students who are entering either grade for the upcoming school year. The parents are given a tour of the school by the Parent Coordinator, while the children are screened in literacy and math skills. The Kindergarten grade leader contacts the pre-schools to discuss curriculum alignment and offers parent workshops to the incoming parents on the prerequisite skills needed to enter kindergarten. School tours and School-Community events accord current and prospective families the opportunity of a meet and greet. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teaching staff, through their representatives on the School Local Measures Committee (MOSL), to determine the best local measures for their school based upon available options approved by the state and city. Teachers and the administration will: . Use the results of baseline and interim assessments as additional information to plan instruction for the year and to focus on key areas of needs for students in their classrooms. . Regularly and consistently, every month, throughout the year assess student progress using the formative or periodic assessments put in place. . Will discuss results and use information from the MOSL process to help drive instructional improvements for the 2018-2019 academic year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2018-19 CEP 76  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 155,654 Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,4271 N/A N/A 1,531,790 X X NA NA X Column B Section Reference(s) X Staff Salaries, After School Program, Supplies, Uniforms, Furniture XStaff Salaries, After School Program, Supplies, Uniforms, Furniture N/A N/A X Staff Salaries, After School Program, Supplies, Uniforms, Furniture 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 77   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 78  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 191K in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 191 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 79  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 80  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 191, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 81  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 82  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 83  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 84  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 85  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name The Paul Robeson School Borough Brooklyn School Number 191 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Hadar Gahfi Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Beata Koziel Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Hart Teacher/Subject Area Christine Sidman Related-Service Provider Tamara Jones Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Jeanette Martin Parent Coordinator Natalia Roach Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 173 2018-19 CEP 86 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 191 uses Work Sampling System, Baseline and Benchmark ELA Assessments (ReadyGen) and Baseline and Benchmark Math Assessments (Go Math), BOY, MOY and EOY NYC Performance Tasks (MOSL), and teacher- created assessments to assess the skills of our ELLs and to guide instructional planning for ELs. A summary of results indicate that our ENL students are in need of increased achievement in areas of phonemic awareness, reading comprehension, listening comprehension, reading expression, writing, and vocabulary development. We also use data from the CCLS-aligned Math Baseline Assessments, Benchmark Assessments for grades K-5, and the ELL Interim Assessments for possible third, forth, and fifth grade ENL students. All English learners need additional support for academic language development in the areas of ELA, mathematics, science, social studies, and technology. In addition there are needs for teaching strategies related to developing literacy and building comprehension skills in all content areas. All staff members at P.S.191 have an access to data to use to planning instruction 2018-19 CEP 87  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Using ongoing progress monitoring as a source of data to inform decision making will both facilitate decision making and students' progress. When students demonstrate reading difficulties, the provision of AIS small group intensive interventions targeting their instructional needs and then monitoring their progress ensures that instruction is modified to meet the needs of students. Our students demonstrate low literacy skills in their first language and English. After screening on early reading indicators, including phonological awareness, letter knowledge, and word and text reading using native language and/or English it is important to provide instructional support to ELs with low performance in reading areas even when oral language skills in English are low. AIS Interventions should address development of language and literacy skills. It's important to monitor progress of ELs frequently (a minimum of six times per year for students at risk for reading), promote language and vocabulary development throughout the day, integrate academic language development into core instruction across subject areas, scaffold language and opportunities to respond, and provide opportunities for appropriate peer learning including peer pairing and small group instruction. If needed provide RTI or necessary highly intensive interventions until the students are able to benefit from reading instruction provided within the classroom core instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To identify baseline, progress and areas of need we use NYC Performance Tasks (MOSL) three times a year (BOY, MOY, EOY), CCLS-aligned Math Baseline Assessment for grades 3-5, CCLS-aligned ELA and Math Fall and Spring Benchmark Assessment , Fall and Spring ELL Periodic Assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELs in a variety of ways. We use both formal and informal data to assess our students and their growth over time. We examine students in our freestanding ELL program. The formal data includes the number of students passing the NYSESLAT and meeting proficiency in ELA, Math and Science. Informal data includes teacher observations ,running records and teacher made assessments. The combined data provide for a holistic picture of the performance of each student, and in turn, allows for reflective professional practice. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using ongoing progress monitoring as a source of data to inform decision making will both facilitate decision making and students' progress. When students demonstrate decoding and reading comprehension difficulties and low performance in content area subjects the provision of AIS small group intensive interventions targeting their instructional needs and then monitoring their progress ensures that instruction is modified to meet the needs of students. Our students demonstrate low literacy skills in their first language and English. After screening on reading indicators, including phonological awareness, letter knowledge, and word and text reading using native language and/or English it is important to provide instructional support to ELs with low performance in reading areas even when oral language skills in English are low. Academic Intervention Services should address development of language and literacy skills. It's important to monitor progress of ELs frequently (a minimum of six times per year for students at risk for reading), promote language and vocabulary development throughout the day, integrate academic language development into core instruction across subject areas, scaffold language and opportunities to respond, and provide opportunities for appropriate peer learning including peer pairing and small group instruction. If needed provide RTI or necessary highly intensive interventions until the students are able to benefit from reading instruction provided within the classroom core instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Scores on the last NYSESLAT and NYSITELL indicate that 1 of our students scored at Expanding Level in NYSITELL Fall 2017 (Kindergarten ), 7 at the Emerging Level in NYSESLAT 2017, 2 at the Transitioning Level in NYSESLAT 2017 and 2 at Expanding Level in NYSESLAT 2017. RLAT report from AIS is used to evaluate and inform about performance in Listening, Reading, Writing and Speaking. In addition Item analysis reports for NYS ELA, NYS Math, NYS Science and NYC Performance Tasks (MOSL) are used to evaluate and inform our students program. 2018-19 CEP 88  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We utilize differentiation of instruction to meet the needs of ENL students who are at different levels of English language proficiency. We scaffold academic language to support student's participation in content areas. Focus on reading in the content areas with an emphasis on the development of appropriate content area vocabulary and comprehension skills (Phonics, Making Meaning, Wonders, Fundations, 100 Book Challenge, Ready Gen, Go Math). Concentrate on the Writing Workshop where ELs are going to have opportunities to develop appropriate writing skills.Teaching materials include a wide range of print, visuals, manipulatives and digital resources..Needs for small group instruction to improve phonics, develop vocabulary,discussion and questioning techniques, comprehension reading and writing skills. Provide instructions in discussion and questioning skills, study skills, organizational skills, test- taking skills, and organizational strategies Model the use of the language in ways in which students are expected to participate. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The English Language Learners are served in the freestanding ENL pull–out program and push-in program. This instructional program is aligned with mandated ENL/ELA, content area Common Core State Learning Standards, and the Core Curriculum. Oral and written language development is provided during ENL and English Language Arts instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in the freestanding ENL program will receive 360 minutes of instruction each week at the entering. emerging level, 180 minutes of instruction at the transitioning and expanding level and 90 minutes per week at the commanding level. The program emphasizes integration of the four language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The ENL students will be grouped homogeneously for targeted area instruction informed by the NYSiTELL and/ or the NYSESLAT. The ENL teacher is responsible for delivery of mandated minutes of ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To help the ENL students meet the NYS Common Core Learning Standards we will use instructional strategies centered around Phonemic Awareness, Sheltered English, Total Physical Response, the use of multimedia materials, the use of multicultural literature, graphic organizers, accountable talk, the use of maps and visuals, and class presentations. The Balanced Literacy /Mathematics Workshop model will be utilized to focus on the content areas. Other strategies to be emphasized in order to improve the language of ELLs and ELL-SWDs are: • building background knowledge 2018-19 CEP 89  • the integration of children’s native language and cultural backgrounds, values and beliefs • language development will be increased and assessed through the use of vocabulary as integrated into the content areas of literacy, science, mathematics, social studies, music, technology, etc. • the use of manipulatives will facilitate concrete experiences to help students create a context for what they are learning • the incorporation of classroom talk amongst peers to support language development such as asking open-ended questions which require new or extended responses and participation in discussions. The language of instruction in each program model is English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Lab is administered to ELLs whose home language is Spanish. For SIFE students we administer the SIFE assessments.The ENL teacher will consult and network with teachers of ELLs to plan instruction for ENL students and to monitor their progress in a general and/or special education classroom. In addition, we will include ENL/ Home language libraries in the ENL classroom and extensive staff development for all teachers who teach ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: For initial placement of SIFE students we will use records from their country when available and interview parents to try to determine the number of years of schooling the students have had. -We will use Home Language Identification Survey to identify the home language. -We will test the students with NYSITELL and identify their English proficiency level. - We will administer Spanish LAB to new entrants when appropriate to determine home language skills of Spanish speaking students -We will give the students writing assignments (in home language and in English). The writing assignments will be evaluated by staff members who are proficient in a home language of a student (i.e. Spanish, Haitian- Creole, French) and a classroom teacher - We will encourage pre-writing activities. - The students will take mathematics survey. - We will dissect mathematics word problems -We will modify reading assessments. - We will modify tests for the students. - We will organize small group activities. - We will develop rubrics. - The students will create a log with vocabulary and letter sounds. - Use of portfolios to demonstrate progress. To reach the needs of newcomers, the ENL teacher with the collaboration of the General/Special Education teachers will modify the assignments for them and provide productive work that engages them in language learning. Newcomers will participate and show comprehension through pointing, nodding, drawing, using actions or simple responses. We will assign a bilingual student or staff member who speaks the newcomer’s language to explain the rules, to show important places in our school, and to communicate with parents. We will use translators as needed, and in particular, where applicable, in testing situations. After reviewing and analyzing the data from all assessments taken by long term English Language Learners , we concluded that there is a need of small group instruction in order to improve academic vocabulary and reading and writing skills . The AIS providers will work with long term ELLs. The voluntary morning tutoring program and After School Program is provided to improve reading, writing, mathematics, technology skills with inclusion of sports activities. 2018-19 CEP 90  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL program follows the ReadyGen workshop model focusing on the content areas as mandated and modeled by the Department of Education. It composes Reading Aloud, Shared Reading, Guided Reading, Independent Reading and the Writing Workshop. There will be an opportunity for vocabulary development during all aspects of ENL instructions, AIS instructions and after school programs. In addition our school is using the results the ELL Interim Assessments and Periodic Assessments to identify the learning needs of individual students and diagnose their strengths and weaknesses. It will help in planning classroom instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? English Language Learners may be found eligible to receive special education services once it has been determined that a disability exists and that the disability is not solely due to the lack of proficiency in the English language. All ELLs eligible for special education services will continue receiving ENL instructions at the appropriate proficiency and development level. The IEP must be followed and periodically reviewed at Pupil Personnel Committee meetings. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: Targeted intervention programs for ELs in ELA, math, and other content areas: • SETSS- long term ELs will be provided with related services at risk (5 times per week) • Reading, Writing, and Mathematics Workshops in class (everyday) and during ENL lessons (six periods per week) to develop appropriate reading, writing, and mathematics skills- in small groups • Science lessons and labs in class (four times a week) and once a week in ENL class to develop appropriate science skills- in small groups Technology lessons and labs at least once a week in Technology and Computer Laboratory to develop/ improve appropriate technology skills (Key Board, Microsoft Word, Internet, Power Point. Students in grades K-5 have regular access to computers in their classrooms and take turn working independently on the computer during literacy and math sessions. • Social Studies lessons in class (two times a week) and once a week in ENL class to develop appropriate social studies skills- in small groups • Academic Intervention Services- ENL students will be provided with targeted instruction in reading, writing ,science, social studies, or mathematics during the school day (Push-in AIS Services) • After School Programs- ENL students have opportunities for after school programs in groups with inclusion of sports activities • Literacy, mathematics, science, and social studies initiatives allow students to receive small group instruction and test practice at their individual level (4 periods a week) • Student Assessment Analysis- individual perspective and diagnostic plans are designed to facilitate tutoring and differentiated instruction • Student Services Support Team (two times per month) and Least Restrictive Environment (once a month)- conferences among professionals to discuss student's cumulative records and recommend interventions • Inquiry Team Group- ENL students are assisted in small groups to improve their academic skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? There are programs in session in this school year. After School Program is offered to all the students in grades K-5 who qualify for free or reduced lunch, filed a lunch form and filed an application. Most ELs attend the program or will attend when the application will be approved. . All ENL students and their classes have an opportunity to participate in Dance Program once or two times a week. The Dance Program is taught by a dance teacher and is designed to integrate literacy into technique and creative movement. . The program is meant to celebrate the arts in a way that caters to the learning styles of every student. 2018-19 CEP 91  The Celebrated Child Initiative allows students, with inclusion of new ENL students, and adults to dialogue and help students achieve and adjust academically, socially and emotionally. Mighty Milers Program target specific student needs in physical fitness and it is open to all the students at P.S. 191. In addition we are in the process of applying for grants to enhance and create new programs within the school. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All English Language Learners are afforded equal access to all the school programs we have in action. The information and applications for after school programs are sent to parents in English and the home language. The assistance is provided to parents of ELLs if they need help with applications. AIS push- in, AIS- pull out (two times a week) and SETSS (two times a week) for ENL students at risk are in place to support them.. Instruction is differentiated to address students' different areas of strengths and weaknesses.. Students who are weakest in a specific modality would be sometimes grouped together so that they could benefit from instruction and practice exercises geared towards strengthening them in the weak area. At times a weaker student and a stronger student would be paired together so that the stronger student can help the weaker while he too, consolidates his knowledge . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: The instructional materials, including technology are used to support ENL students. The 100 Book Challenge Program K-5 Independent Reading ( daily) , Ready Gen , Wonders, Go Math, Wilson Fundations Program K-2, Voyager Passport Program, Guided Reading K-5, Making Meaning K-5, WRAP K-5, and the components of Balanced Literacy are used to improve vocabulary,decoding, comprehension, writing skills, and content areas skills. Reading Rescue Tutoring methods are used in ENL classroom and during AIS sessions to improve students' reading skills. The Spanish books, Multicultural books, Science books, Social Studies books, and Mathematics books are available in the school library, ENL classroom, and other classrooms to support students and their learning and engage students and their families into reading. The listening centers with tapes and books are in place in every classroom to reach the needs of ELs to improve their listening skills. There is a use of Santillana Program in ENL classroom for grades 3-4 to satisfy the diverse needs of our students. Students are able to use computers and improve their technology skills and knowledge during lessons in Technology and Computer Laboratory, after school sessions, and at home having access to After School Computer Programs. All the services, programs or initiatives target specific student needs ranging from attendance and punctuality, physical fitness and exposure to the arts, to leadership skills, social and emotional development, and all four core content areas. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is offered through a variety of methods, including the use of Total Physical Response (TPR), through scaffolding and in small flexible groups. Home language support is provided in all subject areas including writing, mathematics, social studies and science . The Spanish LAB is administered to ELs whose home language is Spanish. All ELs have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in ENL classroom, students' classroom and home. In addition ELs have access to Google Translate in every classroom and in Computer Lab.The buddy system is implemented. Entering and Emerging ELLs (if possible) are paired with students of higher English proficiency levels who speak their home language. If SIFE students come to our school we administer the SIFE assessments. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All the resources correspond to ELLs' ages, grade levels, and reading levels to meet the needs of our ENL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 2018-19 CEP 92  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently we do not have activities to assist newly enrolled ENL students before the beginning of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently there are no languages offered as electives 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We provide professional developments how to assist ELs as they transition from elementary to middle school. At P.S.191 weekly Grade Conferences for collaborative planning with classroom teachers and an ENL teacher and weekly Professional Development sessions will take place. Professional Development will be provided in ENL strategies and Wilson.Professional Development that targets the needs of teachers of ENL students will be offered (Strategies for Teaching ELs in the general education classroom; ENL Standards and Common Core State Standards; How to Develop Language; Instructional Structures that Support ENL Students; Stages of the Second Language Acquisition, Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners; Differentiated Instruction for ELLs; Teaching English Across the Content Areas- Teaching Mathematics to ELLs; Teaching Science to ELLs; How to Teach Long-Term English Learners?; Common Core for Not-So - Common Learner). ENL teachers and other staff members working with ENL students will attend additional workshops offered by NYC DOE office of ELL. All teachers will be offered the opportunity to attend upcoming conferences TESOL. To support staff in assisting ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school we will prepare information about middle schools in our area, possible programs and courses offered, and to be studied. We will organize trips to different middle schools for students and then discuss possible opportunities . 7.5 hours of ELL training was provided for all staff members by ENL teacher as per Jose P . Every staff member received PD folder with all the topics covered (What is ENL, ELL? ; Who is the English Language Learner? ; Selection Criteria and Placement; ENL Strategies in General Education/ Special Education; Total Physical Response; Bilingual/ ENL Education Frequently Used Terms; NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, and NYSESLAT; Stages of the Second Language Acquisition). In addition ELL training will be provided for all new staff members once a month during professional development hour to meet the requirement as per Jose P. The records will be maintained in the Faculty Binder of the staff members who attend the training 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 93  Weekly Professional Development sessions will take place. Professional Development will be provided in ENL strategies and Wilson. Professional Development that targets the needs of teachers of ENL students will be offered (Strategies for Teaching ELLs in the ENL Standards and Common Core State Standards, How to Develop Language; Instructional Structures that Support ENL Students; Stages of the Second Language Acquisition, Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners; Differentiated Instruction for ELLs; Teaching English Across the Content Areas- Teaching Mathematics to ELLs; Teaching Science to ELLs; How to Teach Long-Term English Learners?; Common Core for Not-So - Common Learner). ENL teachers and other staff members working with ENL students will attend additional workshops offered by NYC DOE office of ELL. All teachers will be offered the opportunity to attend upcoming conferences TESOL. The records will be maintained in the Faculty Binder of the staff members who attend the training Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited every Tuesday to school from 2:20 to 3:30 to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Translators are present during these meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited for Parent Workshops that are organized by P. S. 191's staff members, such as SETSS teacher/ RTI Provider, Parent Coordinator, Data Person/ Test Coordinator, ENL teacher/ AIS Provider, Guidance Counselor. Parents participate in different shows, field trips, meetings, community activities at school, etc. Translators are present. Parents will be invited to parent orientations on the State Standards, assessments, school expectations and general requirements for ESL program and there will be other opportunities for parents to participate in their children’s education. We ensure that parents participate on various committees, including Parent Teacher Association and the School Leadership Team. They also encouraged to participate in school activities, i.e. field trips, shows, assembly and etc., and workshops. All parents correspondence, including letters, fliers and other communications are translated into languages spoken by our families. Spanish, French and Haitian-Creole translators are available at meetings. The full time Parent Coordinator will continue to provide a great deal of support to parents informing of school activities and events. Parents are invited to attend ongoing orientation sessions during the school year. Notices and letters are translated in order to keep parents informed of school activities and events. Parent Teacher Association meetings are held. Translators are provided during such meetings. In addition parents are informed of school events and educational programs via the School Leadership Team. This team is composed of administrators, parents and teachers who work collaboratively to make decisions and inform of the programs within the school. Parents are also encouraged to participate in the following activities. Volunteers, Community Leaders and Liaisons as well as school staff and Parent Coordinator provide workshops to parents on various topics. Ongoing Curriculum Workshops In Mathematics and Literacy are provided. Parents have an opportunity to analyze test results of their children on Schoolnet with assigned staff members. Parenting workshops are also provided to parents of newly arrived students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. A student who has exited the ENL program will receive 90 minutes Integrated ENL instruction in a core content areas per week for at least two years and will be monitored formally. The ENL teacher in cooperation with the General and/or Special Education teacher will be responsible for monitoring that ENL student. Monitoring will consist of the following measures of student 2018-19 CEP 94  performance: report card grades, tests scores, student performance, teacher observation, and progress in meeting the NYS CCLS Standards in all areas. The ENL teacher will help assist to adopt and modify material and instruction to the exited student, thereby facilitating the transition. 2018-19 CEP 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Hadar Gahfi, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Paul Robeson School School DBN: 17K191 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Hadar Gahfi Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Natalia Trivers-Roach Parent Coordinator Beata Koziel ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sonia Witter- Clue Parent Jennifer Hart Teacher/Subject Area Tamara Jones Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 6/30/18 2018-19 CEP 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K191 School Name: The Paul Robeson School Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Beata Koziel ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An annual needs assessment will be conducted, which includes the Principal, Assistant Principal, Pupil Accounting Secretary, Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher, regarding the written translation needs of the students enrolled in P.S 191. Each student's Home Language Identification Survey was assessed. All students whose home language was listed as not English on the survey was reviewed and discussed. If it is ascertained that a student's parent needed either a written translation or oral interpretation, accommodations would be made to ensure that the appropriate assistance will be provided to the parent. We will closely monitor parent language access needs. Written and oral language preference data is collected via the following forms and entered by school secretary in ATS (student registration form, Home Language Identification Survey, Emergency Contact Card) 2018-19 CEP 98  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish French English Arabic 7 1 161 4 4.4% 0.6% 95% 4 7 1 161 4 4.4% 0.6% 95% N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation of all documents, such as: The documents will be distributed in a timely manner. school's academic programs, September 2018 student participation in school activities, open- school day and evening information, TBA Written translated documents will be sent home in home language to those families who speak other language than English. The Spanish and French translations will be done in our school by qualified staff members. To translate orally and in written form into different language or dialects P.S.191 will use qualified P.S.191's staff members and the services of the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 CEP 99  approaches for increasing achievement, DOE information not available from the central board, information regarding assessments, information which would increase parent participation in school activities. School's Newsletters September 6, 2018 November 8, 2018 March 7, 2019 May 2019 TBA September 2018 January 2019 March 2019 April 2019 May 2019 Monthly Monthly 2018-19 CEP 100  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school will have the formal face-to-face meetings with parents throughout the school year: All the documents will be distributed in a timely manner: Parent-Teacher Conferences (four times), Teacher-Parent Conferences: September 13, 2018; November 15, 16, 2018; March 14, 15, 2019; May 2019 Curriculum Nights (two times), Teacher-Parent September 2018 Parent- Teacher Meetings on Tuesdays, January 2019 Tuesdays 2:30-3:35 Attendance Teacher Conferences with parents as needed, IEP meetings as needed, Guidance Counselor Conferences with parents/ caregivers as needed. Oral translations of scheduled school meetings and activities will be provided as necessary to all parents/caregivers who do not speak English. When necessary a translator will be available to provide assistance to those families who require it. The oral interpretation services will be provided by school staff (Spanish, Haitian- Creole, French) and parent volunteers (African dialect). Limited English Proficient parents will be provided with free over-the -phone interpretation in their language. 2018-19 CEP 101  N/A N/A N/A TBA TBA TBA N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school’s safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices in a time of emergency solely due to their having a language barrier. Should 10% of our parent population speak a primary language other than English or a “covered language”, we will utilize the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate all forms and oral communications into the parent’s spoken language. Staff members who speak parents/ caregivers home language and other staff members who use Interpretation services for parents (over-the phone interpretation) will reach limited-English- proficient families in the event of school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school will notify staff of language assistance services and support school staff in providing written translation services and interpretation services to parents. Every staff member will receive T&I Brochure, Language ID Guide, and Language Palm Card. We will distribute the over-the-phone card to school personnel. We will send an internal letter to school staff twice a year as a reminder of their responsibilities of communicating with LEP parents and what resources are available to them. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 2018-19 CEP 102   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will inform parents of the availability of an access to language assistance services. We will work with our colleagues to create an environment to which parents are aware of and understand how to access language assistance services. We will provide direct outreach to parents about their rights to language assistance services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will distribute parent survey three (3) times a year to parents who need language assistance services to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 103 
