2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K192 School Name: P.S. 192 - THE MAGNET SCHOOL FOR MATH AND SCIENCE INQUIRY Principal: LISET ISAAC 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/IS 192 THE MAGNET SCHOOL FOR MATH AND SCIENCE INQUIRY 332000010192 PK-8 4715 18 TH Ave., Brooklyn, NY 718-633-3061 School Number (DBN): 20K192 718-871-8721 Fax: Phone Number: LISET ISAAC LISAAC@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 20 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: LISET ISAAC Jennifer Colonna NuhaBatwatneh Christina Messina ParvinAkter N/A N/A N/A District Information KARINA COSTANTINO Superintendent: 415 89 th St., Brooklyn, NY kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  BROOKLYN SOUTH FIELD SUPPORT CENTER FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauricierede Govia Executive Director: 415 89TH STREET BROOKLYN NY 11209 Degovia@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Liset Isaac or Catherine Campanella Nancy Holub NuhaBatwatneh N/A ParvinAkter N/A N/A N/A Christina Messina Danielle Green Marissa Garland *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Representative Member/UFT Representative Member/UFT Representative 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) XiomaraBustamante Member/PTA Vice President ParvinAkter Marsha Cumberbatch Fatima Mohamed Member/Title 1 Representative Member/Parent Representative Member/Parent Representative N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? 1. School Mission Statement: PS/IS 192, the Magnet School for Science and Inquiry is the school of character and intelligence. At PS/IS 192 each student is special and precious. Our school mission is to use every minute for every child to excel as a student and as a citizen. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School Collaborations/Partnerships and Special Initiatives: Residencies : Urban Advantage: A standards–based partnership program designed to improve students understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between school and home. Brics for Kids - Dancing Classrooms - Cookshop - CHAMPS - Brooklyn Botanic Gardens - New York Historical Society - Mighty Milers - Imagine Learning - Move to Improve - Music for Many - Staten Island Zoo -Rising New York Road Runners After School Programs : ● NIA is our Community Based after-school program where Middle school students are given the opportunity to participate in academic, sports and recreation, STEM and/or art and music making. ● Brooklyn Arts Council, Cultural After School Adventures (CASA): An after school arts program offering a rich variety of programs in a myriad of art forms to assist schools in meeting benchmarks by the Dept. of Education’s Blueprint for Teaching and Learning in the Arts. Grade 4 is involved in Storytelling and Grade 5 is involved in the Theatre program. ● CHAMPS: A middle school initiative of the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) that promotes physical activity through Zumba, soccer, basketball and track and field. After School Enrichment Chess Scholars - After School Enrichment Engineering - Band and Chorus after school program - IXL After school Program- Students engage in mastering in reading and math skills. 2018-19 CEP 10  - ENL After school Program - NYSESLAT Test Prep Unique Extracurricular Courses: ● STEM is offered to students in grades K-8. Students are engaged in inquiry-based learning through the use of the 5E learning cycle model and the Engineering Design Process. Lessons are interdisciplinary and promote critical thinking skills and problem solving skills. ● Music and Movement is offered to our PK- 3 students incorporating literacy and music. The teacher organizes two culminating performances incorporating music, dance, art and writing. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2. Student Population and Needs: PS/IS 192 has a large population of ENL Students (English as a New Language) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Approximately one third of our school’s total population is comprised of ENLs. Our ENL population is very diverse, with students speaking languages such as Spanish, Uzbek, Tajik, Chinese, Arabic, Urdu, Russian, Bengali, among others. These students are spread across five levels of language proficiency based on the newly adapted levels from the Commissioner’s Regulation Part 154 changes. English as a New Language services are provided through the stand alone (pull-out) and integrated (push-in) models. Approximately 22% of our student population are students with Individualized Education Plans (IEPs). Our school has flexible programs to meet the needs of our SWDs. We offer Integrated Co-teaching classes (ICT) on every grade and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) as well as all related services (speech therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, and counseling). Related services are provided through the stand alone (pull-out) and integrated (push-in) models. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress in the Elements of the Framework for Great Schools: In the past school year, we have utilized the professional learning and parent engagement contractual times to grow in the areas of Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family-Community Ties. Our teachers have benefited from consistently meeting during the designated professional learning times on Monday afternoons. With this additional time teachers have met across the grades and content areas to collaborate, analyze student work and data, and align curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards to increase rigor in instruction. Additionally, teachers were able to sign up for professional learning workshops specifically designed to their needs and interests. Professional learning sessions were designed according to a needs based survey as well as teacher informal and formal observations. We also grew in the area of Strong Family-Community Ties by utilizing the parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. During this time, teachers were able to reach out to parents through phone calls, email, eChalk, Class, Dojo, and the Remind messaging system. The use of Skedula and opportunities to hold meetings to update parents on student progress and classroom events also took place. Also, special activities were planned across the school for students, teachers and parents to engage together, including Dr. Seuss Read Aloud days, Character Day, Pajama Day, Family fun nights and school performances. 2018-19 CEP 11  This school year our key areas of focus are developing Trust, Effective School Leadership, and continued growth in Strong Family-Community Ties. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K192 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 677 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 28 20 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 34 15 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 83.3% % Reduced Lunch 31.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 47.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 28.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.08 4% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 52.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 93 93 93.3% 0.3% 20.8% 1.8% 21.7% 0.7% 4 9% 8.1 46.6% 48% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A NO N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. With the integration of STEM and the Engineering Design Process embedded into our instruction, students were provided with more rigorous, motivating, and individualized instruction. Students were encouraged to problem solve and ask questions. Through observations and feedback, supervisors supported teachers in growing in the Danielson domains by providing feedback, professional learning opportunities, and having teachers collaborate during common planning times and while conduct inquiry group work. Teachers were encouraged to use data to drive instruction and to plan and teach in small groups with the appropriate scaffolds and supports each child needed. This work was evident in the NYS exams. P.S./I.S.192's strengths according to our 2018 NYS ELA Test Results: There was an 13.2% increase of students scoring either a Level 3 or Level 4 compared to 2017. Grade 3 increased by 13.1% in students achieving a Level 3 or 4 compared to 2017 and declined by 16.3% in students scoring a Level 1 in ELA. Grade 4 had a 23.9% increase in students achieving a Level 3 or 4 with the Level 1 decreasing by 12.4%. Grade 5 increased by 9.6% with students achieving a 3 or 4. Grade 6 made an 18.7% increase in students achieving a level 3 or 4 and a 4% decrease in level ones. Grade 7 made a 6.8% increase in students obtaining a level 3 or 4 with a 4.1% decrease of level 1s. Grade 8 made a .87% increase in levels 3 and 4 and decreased by 12.3% in level ones. P.S./I.S.192's strengths according to our 2018 NYS Math Test Results: There was a 9% increase of students achieving a level 3 or 4 overall and a 1.2% decrease of level 1s schoolwide. Grade 3 students made a 7.9% increase in levels 3 and 4. Grade 4 made a 21.5% increase with students achieving levels 3 and 4 and had a 16.2% decrease of level one students. Grade 6 had a 17.3% increase of students who scored a level 3 or 4 with a 10.9% decrease of level 1s. Grade 7 had a 3.9% increase of levels 3 and 4. Grade 8 had a 9.9% increase of students achieving a 3 or 4 and a 4.1% decrease of level 1s. 2. The priority need that will be addressed in this goal and action plan for this Framework element is increasing the quality of student discussion and teacher questioning. According to Advance data, teachers need support in component 3b: Questioning and Discussion. Only 1% of the teachers received a Highly Effective in that area last school year 2017-2018. Another priority need area is mathematics for grades 5 and 7 according to 2018 state math test results. Grade 5 had a 9.6% increase of students obtaining a level 1 on the state exam. Grade 7 had an increase of 6.5% students achieving a level 1. 2018-19 CEP 14  Additional Narrative: Our Needs Assessment must touch on the following components in order to evaluate rigorous instruction: instruction must be customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). We will continuously analyze data and record observations as students engage in tasks in all academic areas. Teachers will plan lessons based on data and use Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies as well as embed STEM into their instruction. This will help to increase rigor, as well as questioning, discussion, and problem solving techniques used in the classrooms. Rigor and engagement: How are we building independence with student thinking? Are students using a variety of sources to inform their learning? Are students using various types of knowledge to foster their thinking? These goals are drawn from the vision of the Common Core Learning Standards to help prepare our students to be college and career ready. Questioning and discussion techniques: Do teachers monitor which students are rarely speaking? How to they bring those students into the discussion. Accountable talk is encouraged through the use of talking prompts. Teachers are challenged to incorporate higher levels of questioning through the use of the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) question stems resource. We need to further build on the use of multiple entry points (UDL) to scaffold instruction for all learners in our class and increase the proficiency levels. Students will be engaged in the Engineering Design Process to become natural problem solvers as they engage in STEM based projects aligned to their daily instruction. Through looking at teacher ratings and observations, the level of rigorous instruction can be measured through examining domain 1a: Planning and Preparation, 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction, 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and 3c: Engaging Students in Learning from the Charlotte Danielson Framework, providing feedback and support on these domains in order to make improvements and trying new strategies to acheive higher effectiveness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 school year teachers will increase the rigor of their instruction in the area of student engagement by embedding STEAM into their instruction by using the Engineering Design Process and embedding the Arts. This will be measured by having a 3% increase in students achieving at a proficient level (Levels 3 & 4) on the State ELA and Math Exams. Increased rigor will result in students’ abilities to master the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards as shown by improved results on the State Exams. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. Professional Learning: The school administration will utilize Charlotte Danielson Framework to develop teachers in the areas of planning, preparation, and instruction to increase the level of academic rigor and discussion and questioning techniques that prepare students for the challenge of the Common Core standards. Teachers participate in on-going staff development both inside and outside of the school building provided by Columbia University Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to ensure that we are preparing all of our students for the rigor of the new tasks they are facing. The administration team and Data Specialist will provide on-going professional development in planning, assessment, data analysis, Special Education and to meet the needs of our English Language Learners. Teachers participate in inquiry groups and professional learning activities each week in which they are sharing strategies and pedagological methods to increase their professional growth. A STEAM committee has been established to support and provide guidance for incorporating STEAM and the Engineering Design Process in teacher's daily lessons. Professional Development sessions will be held to support teachers with the implementation of STEAM. 2. Small Group Instruction: Small group instruction is strategically created based on assessment data to address students’ short- and long-term learning goals that assist in the work of our students performing on standard academically. This work is accomplished through guided reading, strategy groups, and group conferences. Teachers will apply Universal Design for Learning strategies as a way to support and engage all students including our ENL students and students with disabilities. Teachers also differentiate according to students needs by creating various tools and appropriate scaffolds to support their learning. Teachers will also use small group instruction to challenge students who can be pushed to higher levels. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 09/2018 – 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Classroom teachers, Data Specialist, Teacher’s College Staff Developers, STEAM Committee All Classroom Teachers, Academic Intervention Services Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers 09/2018 – 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom teachers, English as a New Language teachers, Academic Intervention Services teachers Various student groups (English as a New Language, Students with Disabilities Academic Intervention Services, gifted, etc.) 3. New Teacher Development: Internal and external support is provided to all new and at-risk teachers. Weekly mentoring will be provided through peer inter-visitation, collaboration and one on one sessions with administration and assigned mentor. An outside English as a New Language (ENL) consultant through the Classroom Teachers 09/2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Mentors, Classroom teachers, External Consultants 2018-19 CEP 16 Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE) will be utilized to provide professional development to general education teachers on ENL methodologies and strategies. 4. STEAM Integration: Teachers engage their class in hands-on STEAM activities that will foster problem solving, critical thinking, and improvement in math. A STEAM Lab is set up for classes to visit and work on projects. Resources are available for teachers to borrow to incorporate into their daily instruction. A STEAM committee will plan events and keep the staff abreast of the STEM Framework and provide ongoing professional learning to support all teachers. The STEAM committee will also hold STEAM related Family Fun Nights or activities during our Parent Empowerment time on Tuesdays. Parent workshops will also be held to inform parents about the Engineering Design Process protocol for our annual STEAM Fair. 5. STEM Cluster Program K-8: Classes in grades K-8 are scheduled to visit the STEM lab either once or twice a week. The STEM Cluster teacher will engage the students in the Engineering Design Process and foster critical thinking and problem solving skills through hands-on learning tasks and through the use of various technology. The students will also learn how to code. 6. The Visual Arts teachers (Art, Music, and Music and Movement Cluster Teachers) will incorporate STEM into their programs and work with the classroom teachers and STEAM committee to create and foster a STEAM environment and learning experiences for all students Pre-K-8, as well as utilize strategies to meet the needs of all learners in their classes. The Visual Arts teachers will coordinate performances and showcases to highlight their work for parents to see and enjoy. All Students Pre-K-8 and their families. 09/2018-06/2019 Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers, STEM Coordinator Classes in Grades K-8 09/2018-06/2019 Cluster/Science Teacher, All Students Pre-K-8 and their families. 09/2018-06/2019 STEM Coordinator/Assistant Principal STEM Teacher, Music Teacher, Art Teacher, Music and Movement Teacher, Classroom Teachers, STEAM Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school engages our families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home by providing them with monthly newsletters containing the topics and skills that their students will be learning in each subject area each month and the Parent Coordinator hosts family workshops on how to help their child with the GoMath program and engaging their child in the Engineering Design Process as well as inviting parents to publishing parties and parent engagement activities. Each month, our school hosts a "Family Fun Night". October- Pumpkin Decorating 2018-19 CEP 17  Thanksgiving- Family Potluck December- Ornament Making January- Winter Activity February- Valentine's Day craft March- St. Patrick's Day activity April- Spring Activity During Parent Teacher conferences in November 2018 and in March 2019, teachers will provide updates on their child's progress and resources that will help them help their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following staff are involved in assisting the school achieve this annual goal: Administration, Mentors, Classroom Teachers, STEM Cluster Teacher, SETSS and ENL Teachers, TC and CITE Consultants and the Data Specialist. New teachers have two mentoring periods built into their weekly schedule to allow for observation of instructional practices and a debrief session. Teachers are provided with coverage as needed for external consultants to provide them with professional development sessions. STEM projects are planned to take place through out the year that are aligned to a content area and is indicated on our pacing calendar. STEM is embedded into daily instruction in all classrooms in grades K-8. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In March of 2019, teachers will meet with administrators after observations per the Advance Evaluation cycle to reflect on and discuss the topics listed below by reviewing observation reports conducted up until that point in time. During this discussion teachers will evaluate their progress in increasing motivation in rigorous instruction. 1. Professional Learning: The effectiveness of Professional Development will be evaluated through formal and informal observation in the following components: 1e (Designing coherent instruction) , 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) conducted by school administrators as they follow up on strategies presented in the professional development workshops. The school’s Professional Learning Team will meet regularly to evaluate the effectiveness of the professional learning taking place and identify areas for continued improvement. 2. Small Group Instruction: The effectiveness of small group instruction will be evaluated through the process of conferring, observation, pre- and post- On Demand assessments, and formal and informal Teachers College Reading 2018-19 CEP 18  and Writing Project (TCRWP) running records. These assessments will be monitored to inform and drive our instruction during small group instruction. 3. New Teacher Development and Teachers with a TIP: The effectiveness of the new teacher professional development will be evaluated through formal and informal observation in the following components: 1e (Designing coherent instruction) , 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) conducted by school administrators as they follow up on strategies presented in the professional development workshops. Mentors will meet with mentees on a weekly basis to discuss progress and next steps. Mentors will debrief with administration on the progress of mentees. Administrators will meet with teachers with a TIP periodically to review TIP and monitor where improvements have been made based on observations, ratings, and feedback. Administrators will set new goals for teachers with a TIP after each periodic review and provide the teacher with the appropriate supports such as professional development opportunities and arrange inter-visitations for the teacher to observe and learn. 4. School Leadership Team: The members of the School Leadership Team will review the CEP on an ongoing basis and update each action plan as new initiatives are in place in our school that will aide in meeting our goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustment to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Teacher Observations: 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport): Currently, 98.85% of our teachers are either effective or highly effective in this area. We would like to see a 5% increase in highly effective ratings (44.83% to 50%) to help create a more supportive environment. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide: 1. Strengths:  93% of our students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at our school.  96% of teachers who teach students in grades pre-k through 5 feel that a lot or all of the students in their classes feel it is important to come to school every day.  92% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at our school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards.  93% of teachers teach critical thinking skills to students. 2. The priority needs that will be addressed in this goal will be to create a school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers. Based on the School Quality Guide, students were surveyed, and the following are some of their responses:  69% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers help them catch up if they are behind.  69% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something new.  53% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. 3. In order to support the whole child, teachers use data to drive their instruction and create scaffolds and supports to meet their individual needs. SIT/PPT meetings are scheduled to discuss any student concerns. Students are able to express their talents and interests in our Music, Art, and STEM classes. Students are also acknowledged for good citizenship and improved academics with our monthly, "Student of the Month" initiative. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 20  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 school year, the school will work to foster a more supportive environment specifically in the area of students feeling challenged and respected by their teachers and by peers as measured by a 3% increase in positive responses on the 2018-2019 Student Learning Environment Survey regarding questions related to students feeling challenged and respected by establishing a culture to meet the students' social and emotional needs. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. National Bullying Prevention Month- During the month of October, classes will engage in various anti-bullying activities. All students 09/2018-06/2019 Guidance counselors, all teachers, administration The goal is to encourage communities to work together to stop bullying and cyberbullying by increasing awareness of the prevalence and impact of bullying on all children of all ages. Students will make posters with positive messages and will be encouraged to do good deeds for others and make new friends. "Bully Reporting" Sheets are available in all classrooms in Grades 4-8 in which students can anonymously report any bullying so that administration and guidance can address immediately. 2. Respect for All: Students will participate in numerous activities in which the concept of respecting each and every one's differences will be emphasized and celebrated within the school community. Students will be able to see our guidance counselors and our Respect For All Liaison whenever they need so one to talk to . 3. Parent Engagement Activities: There will be ongoing communication between teachers, students and parents through the use of the DOJO system, Remind Application, school website and School Messenger in which teachers can provide daily updates to students academic progress and behavior by adding comments or earning points as a positive reinforcement. Teachers will utilize their time on Tuesdays for Parent Empowerment by inviting families to one to one meetings, celebrations, class activities, or assemblies. There will also be monthly Family Fun Nights where parents are invited to engage in an activity with their child and teachers as well as workshops done by classroom teachers. Themes for Family Fun Nights include Halloween (pumpkin decorating), Thanksgiving (Cultural Potluck), and December ( ornament making). Other family activities include, STEM and Cookshop. Parents are also invited to our Student of the Month Assembly which take place every two months. All students 09/2018 – 06/2019 Guidance counselors, all teachers, administration All students, all families 09/2018 – 06/2019 Guidance counselors, all teachers, administration, parent coordinator 2018-19 CEP 22  4. Student Involvement/Participation Activities: All Students 09/2018 – 06/2019 Guidance counselors, all teachers, administration, parent coordinator Students in Grades 6-8 will have the opportunity to apply for a monitor job for community service, to earn awards, and to learn responsibility. Two students from each class are acknowledged for good citizenship and most improved performance on a monthly basis and are highlighted on our Student of the Month bulletin board. They receive a certificate as well at bi-monthly assemblies during parent engagement time. Students with 100% attendance are acknowledged monthly as well. Their names are posted on a bulletin board and receive a certificate. Teachers are encouraged to hang the lists outside their classroom doors. Announcements are made over the PA to acknowledge classes with 100% attendance on a weekly/monthly basis. An Honor Roll bulletin board/system is in place to acknowledge academic achievements for students in grades 6-8. They are celebrated at an assembly. Pre K – 8 grade students participate in Have a Heart Activities to enhance and acknowledge respectful behavior among peers. Our Middle School students are a part of Service in Schools and the Global Scholars program. 5. STEAM Integration- Students will engage in inquiry tasks that involve problem solving which will also promote critical thinking and inquiry skills. All classes will have a wondering wall to promote questioning and thinking outside the box. All students in Pre-K-8 will participate in our Science/STEAM Fair. Classes are encouraged to conduct STEM/STEAM activities throughout the year in their classroom or in our STEM Lab. Ongoing Residencies such as, Project Green Reach, Studio in a School and Puppetry in Practice will be taking place. 6. Assemblies and Announcements- Assemblies are held throughout the year to address important issues to students regarding safety and discipline as well as to acknowledge their academics, achievements, and citizenship. Each morning, student birthdays of the day are announced and are given a birthday sticker and pencil. Students will also be acknowledged over the loud speaker for great achievements such as winning the Spelling Bee or STEM/Science Fair. Monthly Assemblies are held for our Have a Heart Initiative. Students who earn the most red tickets for being acknowledge for doing kind deeds, have a chance to win prizes each month. 7. Professional Learning Workshops- Guidance counselors, members of the School-Based Assessment Team, and outside presenters will conduct professional learning sessions and All Students 09/2018 – 06/2019 All teachers, administration, STEM teacher All Students 09/2018 – 06/2019 All teachers, administration, guidance counselors All Staff 09/2018-06/2019 Guidance Counselors, SAT 2018-19 CEP 23 trainings on sensitive topics to train staff to look for signs of bullying, suicide, child abuse, de-escalation strategies, etc. 8. The Yale Ruler Method will be applied by administration and staff to teach and foster emotional intelligence skills in order to create a safe space for our students to learn and grow. All Staff 00/2018-06/2018 Team, Administration Administration, teachers, support staff, office staff, parent coordinator, guidance counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage and support our families in understanding our Supportive Environment and in order to support their children at home, letters and fliers are sent home in various languages explaining all initiatives that are taken place regarding sensitive issues such as National Bullying Awareness in October and Respect for All. Parents are also invited to workshops informing them about various topics as well as Family Fun Nights and Publishing Parties where parents can engage in activities with their children. This is very helpful for our English Language Learners because it provides them with hands-on experience which they will be able to talk and write about in class. Parents will also be engaged in STEM activities so that they will be able to assist their children complete their STEM Fair Project. This will provide a step by step example for parents to help their children at home. The parent coordinator and translators are present if needed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The guidance counselors, and teachers will assist the students in understanding the importance of a supportive school environment. The students will be involved in assembly programs to address bullying as well as have a heart and middle school initiatives which will promote positive behavior, good deeds, manors, etc. Various teachers will also promote positive behavior within their classroom through incentive programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, we will review the school Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) reports to see if there has been a decrease in student incidents, specifically related to bullying. We will also hold mid-year discussions with teachers regarding student behavior, positive incentives, academic challenges, and classroom culture. Meetings with the SAPIS Counselor and Guidance Counselors will also be conducted to gain input and feedback regarding student engagement and with our No Bullying and Bucket Filling Initiatives. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 24  In Febraury 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustment to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher Observations: 4e (Growing and Developing Professionally): Currently, 98.85% of our teachers are either effective or highly effective in the component growing and developing professionally. We would like to see a 5% increase in highly effective ratings (13.79% to 19%) to help increase collaboration among teachers. 1. Our school's strengths based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide:  94% of students agreed or strongly agreed that they see people of many races, ethnicitys, cultures, and backgrounds represented in the curriculum.  96% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers respect their culture/background.  98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that they are able to use their students' prior knowledge to make their lessons relevant to their everyday life.  98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that they are able to design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' needs (e.g. English Language Learners proficiency and students with disabilities).  90% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated.  90% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas.  95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at our school, teachers talk with one another about instruction. 2.The priority needs that will be addressed in this goal and action plan based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide:  68% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools.  75% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at our school are eager to try new ideas. Additional Narrative: The Professional Learning Team has created a survey for teachers to indicate their strengths and needs across all grade levels. Professional Learning time will be designed to provide teachers adequate time to meet on their grade level and align their curriculum to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and incorporate Universal Design for 2018-19 CEP 26  Learning (UDL) strategies into their lessons. An "Area of Expertise" list has been created and will be posted on each floor to create an environment where teachers can provide support to each other based on areas they have experience in. Professional Learning sessions will be provided based on school foci and teacher needs such as English as a New Language (ESL) strategies and methodologies, UDL strategies, Turn Key of Teachers College professional development sessions attended by the instructional leads teachers, Guided Reading strategies and analysis of data. Teachers are also provided common planning time at a minimum of once per week to meet collaboratively on their grade level. Mentoring for new teachers is scheduled twice per week to improve teacher practice based on the Danielson Framework for teaching. All teachers will be part of the school's inquiry team. As part of this inquiry work, each teacher will select two students for a case study. The teachers will meet with their inquiry team to analyze data and share best practices while working with their case study students. The teachers will monitor student growth every 6-8 weeks and re-evaluate their work to determine which method will result in an increase of student achievement as well as to improve better teacher practice. Administrators work along side teachers to find their strengths to develop an opportunity for them to lead in various ways through the following roles: mentor, data analysis, professional learning facilitator, testing committee members, professional learning team members and/or instructional lead members. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 school year, the school will improve collaboration among teachers by engaging in data inquiry teams in order to analyze student work, discern their strengths and weaknesses, research new methods and strategies to tailor instruction to meet the needs of all learners including students with disabilities, English Language Learners and advanced students as measured by a 3% increase in student achievement on New York State Exams. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1 Professional Learning: Professional Learning will be conducted based on surveyed teacher interests and needs of the school. Teachers will attend out-of-building professional development and will then be encouraged to share with their co-workers by turn-keying this information during the Professional Learning time every other Monday. A calendar of professional learning turn key sessions has been scheduled and will be adjusted throughout the year to reflect professional development sessions that teachers attend. There will be a Professional Learning Committee to address the professional learning needs of all teachers. A list of teachers indicating an area of expertise was created and posted encouraging collaboration among peers. Any teachers who are attending TC professional development sessions have been scheduled to turn key what they learned to the appropriate audience. 2. Teacher Inquiry Teams: Teachers will focus on working with our Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language Students to improve their learning by including Universal Design for Learning (UDL) supports during their English Language Arts (ELA) instruction using research based strategies and instructional techniques. ELA curriculum units as well as strategic learning plans are customized to create long and short-term goals that address the needs of these targeted students. 3. Increased Professional Learning for Paraprofessionals: Through out the year paraprofessionals have been provided the opportunity to attend outside professional development sessions specifically relevant to their career growth. They are involved in Reading Rescue training and meet to discuss their data through the use of the Reading Rescue program. 4. Intervisitations: Teachers will conduct intervisitations into their colleagues classrooms on their grade level and in other grade levels as well as in other schools. Teachers will reflect on best practices and implement strategies learned 5. Meetings with Data Specialist- The data specialist meets with teachers individually or by grade to take a look at student data and discuss areas of focus and next steps. The data specialist provides graphs and percentages as well as strategies for implementation for academic growth. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers, para-professionals 09/2018 – 06/2019 (Every other Monday) All teachers. Assistant Principals, Principal, TC Staff Developers Students with Disabilities and ENL Students 09/2018 – 06/2019 (Every other Monday) All para-professionals 09/2018 – 06/2019 All teachers including Classroom teachers, ENL Teachers, Service Providers. Assistant Principals, Principal, TC Staff Developers Assistant Principals, Principal, Teachers and TC Staff Developers All teachers 09/2018– 06/2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Teachers All Teachers 09/2018- 06/2019 Assistant Principals, Principal, Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 28 6. Advanced Literacy/SIGA Grant-Together with our FSC Instructional Liaison, we are embedding Advanced Literacy skills and working to establish a school wide protocol around Shift 1: Strengthening Core Instruction by using the 4 Hallmarks: Engaging Texts, Rich Discussions, Frequent Writing, and Academic Vocabulary and Language. This work will be embedded through professional development, vertical team planning and capacity building, through our inquiry work, lesson planning and in our classroom environments to meet the needs of our sub-groups and our target population of Hispanic boys. All Students, our target sub-group 09/2018-06/2019 FSC Instructional Liaison, Principal, Assistant Principals, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school collaborates with families in a variety of ways. All important information is posted on our school website and most teachers have a communication app to inform parents about students progress and keep them abreast on any upcoming events. The parent coordinator sends home monthly newsletters containing all topics that their child is learning in every subject and includes various web links and apps that parents can use at home to support their child at home. The parent members of the School Leadership Team engage in conversations with teacher members regarding strategies and professional learning sessions attended and how they can help their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning time has been built into the Monday after-school schedule. This session lasts one hour and forty minutes. During these sessions professional learning is provided internally and externally based on staff needs by staff members and outside facilitators. Teachers and paraprofessionals also take this opportunity to work collaboratively to discuss best practices, specifically the students selected for their inquiry study. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the first week of March 2019, administers met with their teachers to conduct mid-year individual annual goal check-ins and needs assessment for further professional development. Additionally, after each professional learning session, reflection sheets will be completed and reviewed to guide future sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In March 2019, teachers presented samples of student work and data to show progress towards their goals and discussed strategies utilized in order to achieve their goal. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. NYC School Learning Environment Survey: Relevant Highlights 1. Our strengths in this Framework for Great Schools Element- Effective School Leadership, according to the School Quality Guide are:  96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works to create a sense of community in the school.  96% of parents/guardians agreed or stongly agreed that the principal/school leader at this school promotes family and community involvement in the school.  98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader sets high standards for student learning.  98% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress.  95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal makes clear her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 2. The priority need that will be addressed in this goal and action plan for this Framework element is increasing the instructional leadership. According to the School Quality Guide:  80% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader knows what's going on in their classroom.  83% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal and her administrative team will build coherent instructional and social-emotional supports as well use student data to increase the quality of feedback given to teachers resulting in improved teacher practice as captured by teacher observation data and student outcomes as measured by at least a 3% increase in state exam ELA and math scores. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Frequent School Walk-Throughs and Informal Classroom Visits - As a way of providing increased feedback to teachers regarding teacher practice, classroom environment, and student engagement, administrators will conduct several "walk-throughs" each week. After each visit, feedback will be immediately provided via email, one to one meetings, grade meetings, or memos highlighting positive elements noted as well as areas in need of improvement. 2. Facilitated Inter-visitations - Administrators facilitate classroom inter-visitations in order to allow for teachers to observe exemplary teacher practices, discuss new methodology, and share best practices. The assistant principals organize the visits, participates in the visit with the teachers, and leads a discussion after the lesson to debrief. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 09/2018-06/2019 Principals, Assistant Principals, Teacher Mentors All teachers 09/2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Mentors, Grade Leaders 3. New Teacher Development: Internal and external support provided to all new and at-risk teachers. Weekly mentoring will be provided through peer inter-visitation, collaboration and one on one sessions with administration and assigned mentor. New teachers and teachers at risk. 09/2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Mentors 4. Monthly Meetings with the Data Specialist- Each month the data specialist will meet with each grade to take a look at student data and discuss areas of focus and next steps. The data specialist will provide graphs and percentages as well as strategies for implementation for academic growth. 5. Staff Shout Out Bulletin Board- Examples of staff's efforts and exemplary lesson components, achievements, classroom environment will be acknowledged and posted on a bulletin board on the second floor by the principal and administration. Teachers will also be acknowledged via PA system. All Teachers 09/2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Data Specialist All staff 09/2018-06/2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 32  Effective School Leadership and Strategies utilized will be discussed at School Leadership Team monthly meetings in which parent members are present. Calendar dates are posted in the main lobby as well as on our school website. Families are welcome to attend the SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration will allow increase time for daily walk-throughs and provide teachers with immediate feedback via e-mail, one to one discussions and grade specific debrief sessions. Teacher schedules will reflect a weekly common time to meet with their grade to collaborate and join in on inter-visitations with one another. The following staff will be involved in assisting the school achieve this annual goal: Administration, Mentors, Classroom Teachers, IEP Teacher, English as New Language Teachers, TC Staff Developer and the Data Specialist. Teachers will have two mentoring periods built into their weekly schedule to allow for observation of instructional practices and a debrief session. Teachers will be provided with coverage as needed for external consultants to provide them with professional development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In March of 2019, a mid-year meeting with each teacher and their supervisor will be conducted as per the Advance Evaluation cycle to reflect on and discuss the topics listed below by reviewing observation reports conducted up until that point in time. During this discussion teachers will reflect on the feedback that they have been given, sighting what has been most helpful and what they have gained from participating in classroom inter-visitations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In March 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustment to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. New York City School Learning Environment Survey: Relevant Highlights according to the School Quality Guide-  96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit our school.  96% of parents/guardians agreed/strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs.  97% of parents/guardians agreed/strongly agreed that the school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.  98% of teachers agreed/strongly agreed that they understand their families' problems and concerns.  95% of teachers agreed/strongly agreed that, school staff regularly communicate with parents/guardian about how they can help students learn. 2. The priority need that will be addressed in this goal and action plan is to increase the parent involvement in our school. According to the School Quality Guide:  64% of parents/guardians responded that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school sometimes or often.  81% of parents/guardians agreed/strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. Community Based Organization (CBO) and Community Connections: (Currently in Place) - Career Day - Relay for Life - JDRF - CASA: Brooklyn Arts Council - Cook Shop - NIA After School Program - Parent Teacher Association - School Leadership Team 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 school year, the school will work to increase the amount of student/parent participation and opportunities by 5% to volunteer in community-based organizations offered at the school as measured by attendance records at these events. 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Parent Coordinator Initiatives: Our parent coordinator will research and reach out to a broader network of community-based organizations that could benefit our school. In collaboration with partnering teachers, we will also seek out and write grants that can enrich our school and family programs. The Parent Coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops such as "Book of the Month" where she reads and discusses a book of the month that each class will engage in that month. Other workshops include health related topics such as Breast Cancer, Diabetes, etc. Fliers and school messenger reminders are sent home to families prior to each meeting or workshop in each family's respective language. 2. Parents will have the opportunity to volunteer in the classroom and school events such as conducting read a louds, attending field trips, assisting with class parties, and assisting with performances. 3. After School Programs and Residencies- This year our classes will have the opportunity to work with residency programs such as Dancing Classroom, NY Historical Society, Studio in a School, Plaster Galaxy, Music for Many, Brooklyn Arts Council, Cookshop, Staten Island Zoo, Project Green Reach, and Bricks for Kidz. We will also offer an after school enrichment program to students in grades 1-5 for Chess, Engineering, and Coding. These residencies will provide our ELL students with hands-on experiences which will help them retain information and learn new things. 4. Tuesday Parent Empowerment Time- At least once a month teachers will host formal parent gatherings in their classrooms, to create a stronger home-school link. Such meetings will include homework help, math online resources and ENL family links to curriculum. Family Fun nights are hosted several times a year to encourage parent involvement in the school during a relaxed, fun atmosphere. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, parents, and families 09/2018 – 06/2019 Parent Coordinator, Parent Teacher Association members, classroom teachers, school administrators All parents 09/2018-06/2019 All Students 0/9-2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, All Classroom Teachers. Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Teachers All students, parents and families 09/2018-06/2019 Parent Coordinator, Parent Teachers Association Members, classroom teachers, administration. 2018-19 CEP 36 Pajamas reads are hosted monthly in which students and their parents participate in an after school read aloud and activity fostering our students' and family's love of books and reading. STEM parent and family workshops will be held in order to engage families in the Engineering Design Process so that families will be able to support their child with their STEM Fair project. 5. The ENL team will write a monthly parent newsletter each month to inform the parents of what their children are learning at each grade band. The newsletter also includes tips and strategies that parents can use at home with their child as well as upcoming events. ENL students and families 09/2018-06/2010 ENL teachers, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The NIA after school program invites the parents of our Middle School Students to family events such as for the Halloween Dance, Thanksgiving Pot Luck celebrations, and Winter and Spring Showcases. All activities are posted on the school website and school messenger reminders are sent daily to keep parents abreast with events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator and classroom teachers will assist in achieving this goal by developing and organizing family fun after school activities. Parent Coordinator will facilitate language translation assistance to parents for teacher conferences and school events. Parent coordinator facilitates book of the month reading and parent trips to New York City cultural institutions. The school has been provided grant money to fund the art residencies, which also includes family engagement trips on a monthly basis. Teachers hold after-school sessions to provide support to parents in the areas of: homework assistance, on-line curriculum resources, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year meetings will be held with the Parent Coordinator, after school program directors, and CBO liaisons in order to identify needs, progress, and next steps for further development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In March 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustment to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Selection is determined through data analysis of the NYS ELA assessments, Formative and Summative assessments, classroom teacher observations, TCRWP running records, conferences. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Great Leaps : A 1:1 reading program for students in K-8 that promotes fluency in letter sound and word recognition. Imagine Learning : A K-5 technology based reading skills program that uses formative assessment and differentiated, individualized instruction for ESL students. Reading AIS:Small group instruction based on student needs to improve literacy skills with an emphasis on strategies Reading Rescue: Is a program that supports children by providing individualized Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Great Leaps : One-to-one Great Leaps : During the school day Imagine Learning : Individual Imagine Learning : During the school day 2018-19 CEP 39  tutorials aimed at accelerating ReadingAIS:Small Group (Pull out) ReadingAIS: During the school day students' reading progress. Soundsin Motion-Sounds in Motion is an intervention program designed to develop listening skills in children, which in turn helps to improve articulation, and vocabulary skills, auditory memory, phonemic awareness and early literacy. (Early Childhood Fundations-A multisensory, systematic and explicit K-3 phonics/spelling program based on the Wilson Reading System. Orton Gillingham-Orton Gillingham is a sequential phonics-based system that teaches the basics of word formation before whole meanings.The method accommodates and utilizes the three learning modalities, or pathways, through which people learn—visual, auditory and kinesthetic. Reading Rescue: One- to- One Sounds in Motion- whole class Reading Rescue: During the school day Sounds in Motion- During the school day 2018-19 CEP 40  Skybrary-An interactive library of digital books, video explorations and lesson plans designed to engage young readers across multiple subject areas. ELAIntervention- An after school intervention program for students in grades 2-5 to strengthen their skills inELA. i-Ready-reading online program that combines an adaptive assessment with instant reporting, and engaging differentiated instruction customized for each student's unique needs. CSI-Literacy offers rich texts and tasks for literacy teaching and learning. These tasks help students to learn close-reading skills, comprehension strategies, academic vocabulary, oral language and fluency across a range of Fundations- whole class Orton Gillingham- Small Group Fundations- During the school day Orton Gillingham- Before school (Extended day hours) 2018-19 CEP 41  types and disciplines (non-fiction and fiction, social sciences, science and numeracy). Velocity- Skybrary- whole group, small group, independent is a revolutionary K-5 adaptive reading program that enables teachers to provide real 1:1 instruction in the classroom. Using advanced computer technology to optimize learning, Velocity helps educators provide the best and most effective instruction precisely when and how each student needs it most. IXLAfter School- online program that provides academic support in ELA ELAIntervention- whole class and small group i-Ready- individual Skybrary- During the school day and at home. ELAIntervention- After-school i-Ready- During the school day 2018-19 CEP 42  CSI- whole group (shared-reading and co-operative settings) Velocity- small group and independent CSI- During the school day 2018-19 CEP 43  Mathematics Selection is determined through data analysis of the NYS Math assessments, Formative and Summative assessments, and classroom teacher observations. IXL-individual Velocity- During the school day IXL After school, 3-5 days per week i-Ready- Math i-Ready- individual and independent i-Ready- During school day online program that combines an adaptive assessment with instant reporting, and engaging 2018-19 CEP 44  differentiated instruction customized for each student's unique needs. Math Intervention- An after school intervention program for students in grades 2-5 to strengthen their skills in math Great Leaps: A 1:1 math program for students in K-8 reinforcing math facts and skills. IXLAfter School- online program that provides academic support in Math Science Urban Advantage- A standards –based partnership program designed to improve students understanding of scientific inquiry through Math Intervention- After school Math Intervention- whole class and small group Great Leaps- one-to-one Great Leaps- During the school day IXL IXL-individual Urban Advantage- Whole Class and small group After school, 3-5 days a week Urban Advantage- During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 45  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Selection is made through SIT, PPT and classroom teacher observations of student behavior. collaborations between school and home Brooklyn Connections- Crisis Intervention and Counseling – Guidance Counselors and Social Workers meet with students to come up with behavior and attention management plans assisting students in their ability to focus on learning. ThriveNYC- Promotes and assesses mental health in schools Crisis Intervention and Counseling – Crisis Intervention and Counseling – Small Group During the school day Thrive NYC- School wide Thrive NYC- During the day and training sessions during professional learning time. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently two students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will be serviced according to their needs based on data. - School uniform or clothing will be provided as needed. - The cost of field trips will be covered. - School supplies will be purchased and provided as needed. - The cost of Senior Activities will be covered. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 47  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 48  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As of last year, 100% of our teachers are Highly Qualified and teaching within their certification areas. In order to attract highly qualified teachers with beliefs that are aligned to our teaching philosophies, we will continue to update and maintain our school website. Interested teachers will be able to access the school’s most current Annual School Report Card to gain a snapshot view of the school community. Our substitute teachers will be observed as a means to recruit. New teachers will be supported through the New Teacher Mentoring Program and Staff Developers from outside agencies, such as Columbia University Teachers College. Teachers receive individual professional development to match their pedagogical needs and attend professional learning sessions of interest with the approval of the principal. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As the Common Core Standards and Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching implementation continues, school faculty has attended various professional development sessions on how to improve their practice and align instruction to the new city-wide instructional expectations. The administration, data specialist, Teacher’s College Staff Developers, have provided in-house professional development sessions surrounding this work, including support for how to address the needs of all learners. New special education teachers attend monthly support workshops and the IEP teacher attends trainings to support IEP teachers. ENL teachers attend trainings that are offered across the year. The principal attends monthly conferences provided by Teacher’s College. School administrators attend Brooklyn South Field Support Center Principal and Assistant Principal conferences throughout the school year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 49  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). T/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A variety of measures are taken to help students transition into Kindergarten. Near the end of the school year, the Assistant Principal in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator offers a workshop titled “Transitioning to Kindergarten” that is held for the parents of Pre-K students and other parents enrolling their child in school for the first time. Information regarding academic expectations, daily routines, and social and behavioral expectations is discussed. Additionally, Pre-K students engage in a variety of activities to prepare them for the following year including touring the Kindergarten classrooms and practicing eating in the cafeteria. A packet of preparation activities is also sent home over the summer to reinforce letter/sound recognition, sight words, and name recognition. The Parent Coordinator provides information and assistance to parents regarding the application process and options for Kindergarten. Once children arrive in Kindergarten at the beginning of the year, teachers are intentional about providing additional supports for students who are in the school setting for the first time. Student records are carefully compiled and reviewed as they are transferred from the Pre-K teachers to the Kindergarten teachers. Parents are invited to an Open House to learn more about academic expectations and the environment of Kindergarten classrooms. Especially at the beginning of the year, Kindergarten teachers incorporate more movement between activities over the course of the day, repetition of nursery rhymes and poems during shared reading to reinforce letters, oral language experiences for retelling stories, and the incorporation of manipulatives such as puppets for interaction. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At the beginning of the year the Measures of Student Learning (MoSL) team convenes to discuss which assessments will be used for the year, both for evaluation purposes and in general. The team consists of teachers that represent the range of grades and instructional settings across the building. They discuss the relevance of performance tasks, periodic assessments, TCRWPs, etc. Assessments that are the most valuable for informing instruction are chosen and administered. In continuing our implementation of Danielson’s Framework for Teaching (Component 3D) teachers are receiving professional development in using assessment in instruction both formatively and summatively. After each assessment is completed, the Data Specialist compiles and analyzes the data before turn-keying the outcomes to administrators and teachers. 2018-19 CEP 50  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5 and 8 6 5 5 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $470,626.00 $35,774.00 $26,883.00 TBD $4,430,155.00 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 CEP 51   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S./I.S. 192 The Magnet School for Math and Science Inquiry, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S./I.S. 192 The Magnet School for Math and Science Inquiry will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 53  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S./I.S. 192 The Magnet School for Math and Science Inquiry, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and 2018-19 CEP 55  students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. PS/IS 192’s SCHOOL PARENT/GUARDIAN COMPACT It is our belief that student performance will improve as a result of our cooperative efforts to support this compact. This is a three way partnership with a specific goal in mind. It is imperative that each person assume his or her responsibility in an effort to succeed. SCHOOLS RESPONSIBILITIES: · To convene an annual meeting of Title I parents/guardians to inform them of the program and of the · expectation that it will involve them. · To offer a number of meetings at various times and work with parents/guardians to eliminate barriers to their attendance. · To provide effective Parent/ Guardian/ School communications. · To provide varied opportunities for parents to participate in their child’s classroom activities. · To assure parents that they can participate in developmental literacy and math workshops. · To provide parents/ guardians with timely information in their native language on programs and workshops offered. · To help parents with the application process for Middle schools, High schools and gifted programs. · To help parents navigate the special education services. PARENT/ GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITIES: · Provide a quiet place to do homework. · Set aside a specific time to do homework. · Provide a study area that is well-lit and equipped with pens, pencils, paper, etc. · Look over homework assignments to check for understanding. · Sign and return all papers that require a parent/guardian signature. · Encourage positive attitudes toward school. 2018-19 CEP 56  · Read to your child and encourage daily reading. · Require regular school attendance with uniform. · Attend Parent-Teacher Conferences. · Inquire about your child’s progress. · Take an active role in school functions-PTA meetings, Family Fun Nights, Parent workshops, etc. · Make sure your child comes in on time and be here on time to pick him or her up. · To become involved in developing and implementing the School Parent/ Guardian Involvement Policy. · To ask for information on what kind of assistance is available to help become more efficient in assisting out children educationally. · To monitor our children’s attendance at school. · To share in the responsibility in improving our children’s achievement in school. STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES: · Ask the teacher any questions about the homework to make sure you understand. · Take home materials and information needed to complete the assignment. · Complete homework in a thorough, legible and timely manner. · Return homework on time and signed. · Comply with school rules. · Attend school regularly wearing your school uniform. · Be respectful of others. · Respect the personal rights and property of others. TEACHER RESPONSIBILITIES: · Provide quality teaching and leadership. · Respect cultural, racial and ethnic differences of your students. 2018-19 CEP 57  · Assign homework using grade-level time limits. · Give positive, corrective feedback. · Recognize that students are accountable for every assignment. · Check that homework has been completed and signed. · Hold at least two Teacher-Parent Conferences annually. · Alert parents/ guardians to children performing poorly and give advice on how to help. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 58  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP 59  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 60  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 61  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 62  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: During the 2018-2019 school year we plan to provide two after school programs. One program will be offered in the fall for newcomers who came to the U.S. within the last 2 years, and students who scored entering, emerging and transitioning levels on the NYSESLAT 2018 and/or level 1 or 2 on the State ELA Exam 2018. The second program will be offered in the spring for students nearing proficiency on the NYSESLAT 2018. After school programs will be available for students in grades 1-8, for both students in general education classes and students with disabilities (SWDs). The rationale for the fall after school program is to support English Language Learners (ELLs) in developing a strong foundation in English language acquisition so that they can begin to understand and access language for personal interactions (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills, BICS) and academic demands (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency, CALP). Additionally, it targets vocabulary acquisition and help students develop breadth and depth of vocabulary. By utilizing Advanced Literacy Instruction, students will study targeted sets of high-utility vocabulary words that will help students master language and content in classrooms. The rationale for the spring after school program targeting students nearing proficiency on the NYSESLAT (transitioning and expanding ELLs) is to push them to move up performance levels on both the NYSESLAT and ELA exams. Based on the NYSESLAT scores and the EDAT, a significant number of students have remained at the expanding level for more than one year. Additionally, most of these students received a Level 1 or 2 on their ELA Exam. Therefore, we hope to push them to achieve at higher levels and exit the ENL program by receiving a commanding score on the NYSESLAT. This will help them achieve in accordance with the rigorous expectations of the Common Core State Standards. We plan to offer the first after school session in the fall, tentatively starting late November and running until late January for a total of 32 hours. The after school program will be held from 2:35-4:35 on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Four certified ENL teachers will lead the sessions, for grades 1-3 and 4-8 (two classes). Each teacher will lead 16 hours. All after school instruction will be provided in English. We have a library in our ENL support room that has titles that lend themselves to the subject matter at hand. Technology will also be used to further support instruction. We plan for the second after school session for transitioning and expanding ELLs to start mid March and run through the beginning of May for a total of 32 hours. The program will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:35-4:35pm. Four certified ENL teachers will provide instruction for the program. Together we will provide enhanced literacy instruction, simultaneously preparing them for the NYSESLAT and the ELA Exams. The program will target students nearing proficiency on the NYSESLAT and those who scored 1's and 2's on the ELA Exam. The program will be offered to these students in the following grade bands: 1-2, 3-4, and 5-6. Records will be maintained in a secure location in our ENL room. Student attendance will be done daily and kept track of electronically as well as in a binder. Program notification details will be sent home in the parents first language. Our staff will translate them into their home 2018-19 CEP 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information language. When making copies, staff refers to a master list of home languages which indicates the number of a particular home language per class and that many copies are made for those parents who need it. Home language support will be ongoing using various books that are offered in different languages in our library. As well as parent teacher support using communication translated in different languages. We have renewed licenses for our Imagine Learning program. Imagine Learning is a technology based language acquisition program that pre-assesses students' language abilities, provides educational activities specific to their needs, and evaluates growth and mastery. It automatically assesses performance and adapts instruction. This program is already installed on ENL laptops and throughout the building. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In accordance with the CR Part 154 regulations for professional development, all teachers need 20% of their professional development to be ELL specific and ENL teachers need 50% of their professional development to be ELL specific. For new teachers in the building professional development sessions whose focus will be providing ELL specific strategies and support for classroom teachers will be provided. Additionally, our ELL Liaison from District 20 (Lucia Perez-Medina) provides support throughout the year providing support as needed, specifically in the area of the Language Progressions and with Advanced Literacy. Each month every staff member receives a calendar of various ENL professional developments being offered within the district. Our staff is encouraged to register for the topics that meet their needs. We also have a PD schedule in our school that takes place every other week on Mondays, which includes various ENL topics. Every presenter that is giving the professional development must include ENL scaffolds and strategies that is useful to our schools population. This year we hope to find new ways to provide professional development for our staff. We are exploring how to utilize educational webinars to share for best practices with ELLs. We plan to host a study group for teachers working with ELLs by utilizing "Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools" (2016) by Nonie K. Lesaux, Emily Phillips Galloway, and Sky H. Marietta. For teachers in general, instructional concerns and questions regarding ELLs are also addressed during our Teacher's College Staff Development days. On a nearly monthly basis, representatives from Teacher's College come to the school to provide support for reading and writing curriculum and assessment. We work with three different consultants from Teacher's College who address ENL issues for the lower grades, upper elementary, and middle school. This professional development is provided at no additional cost to the Title III budget. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Studies have shown that students perform better academically when parents are involved in their child's education. As part of our continued involvement initiatives for parents of ELLs, ENL staff members plan to host several workshops throughout the year to help parents support higher achievement for their children. At the beginning of the year we will distribute a survey to parents assessing their needs and desires for teacher support and then catered our activities accordingly. These surveys will determine areas that can help parents support their child in school. The survey gave us clear cut ideas on how to help and ensure productive professional developments sessions. In general, we find that our students struggle in the areas of reading and writing, and as such we will offer workshops pertaining to these topics. ENL staff will work together to offer the following workshops: • Fall/Winter - Learning New Vocabulary through Literature • Spring - Preparing for the NYSESLAT • Spring - ENL Resources for Summer • Monthly Meetings/Monthly Newsletters - ENL teachers will work within their grade band to host and provide an overview of the demands of the current units. Notification of these workshops and resources will be provided in various translations and sent home to students' parents. The parent coordinator will also include these events on the monthly calendar distributed to parents. Translation will be provided as needed utilizing our bilingual colleagues. These workshops will be directed to both parents of Title III students and parents of other ELLs. Records will be maintained electronically as well as in a binder in our ENL room. Copies of agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations will be stored in both places to ensure the safety of the documents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum $9600.00 Fall: (16hrs x $50.00 ph) x 4 Teachers = $3200.00 Spring: (32hrs x $50.00 ph) x 4 Teachers = $6400.00 N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Money allocated for Teachers of the two after school programs, one session in the Fall and one session in the Spring. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL -NYSESLAT Prep books -Language Power Books (English and Native Language) -printer ink -Native Language books/libraries (various levels) -After-school program materials -Books for Study Group Imagine Learning Online Program Flocabulary N/A 4 Laptops, 2-iPads $26, 830.00 $7,730.00 NYSESLAT Prep Books: $1700.00 Language Power Books: $800.00 Books for Study Group ("Teaching Advanced Literacy"): 15 books x $35 each book = $530.00 After School Materials and Native Language Books and Library: $4700.00 $5000.00 N/A $4500.00 $26,830.00 2018-19 CEP 66  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Magnet School for Math and Science Inqui Borough Brooklyn School Number 192 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Liset Isaac Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Angela Tavarez Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Colonna/K Teacher/Subject Area Diana Mejia-Linares/1st Grade Related-Service Provider Natalia Diamantakos Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Catherine Campanella Coach School Counselor Marina D'Aniello Parent Nadire Jasari Parent Coordinator Yolanda Fioriello Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 4 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 67  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 671 Total number of ELLs 207 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.85% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Chinese School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 K 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 1 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S./I.S. 192, we use a variety of assessments to evaluate our students’ literacy progress and achievement. Once each quarter, literacy assessments from TCRWP are conducted. These assessments provide a profile of our ENL students’ strengths and weaknesses in literacy. These assessments evaluate letter/sound identification, word identification , and concepts of print (for the lower grades); additionally, differentiated spelling inventories (primary, elementary and upper grade) and running records are also administered. Running records measure students’ ability to decode and comprehend texts based on literal and inferential information. Running records are administered more frequently based on when teachers identify that students are ready to progress to higher reading levels. Teachers differentiate instruction based on the results of these assessments. Strengths and weaknesses are noted and flexible groups are formed for small group instruction to meet the needs of individual students. 2018-19 CEP 68  Students’ writing abilities are assessed using “On Demand” writing tasks. These serve as pre-assessments for students’ writing in the genre of the given unit, evaluating structure, development, craft, and conventions in the narrative genres and non fiction. Individualized instruction and small groups are formed based on the analysis of the students' writing. Then at the end of each unit, final writing pieces are collected and evaluated according to a checklist/rubric. The ENL teachers also utilize these assessments to scaffold their instruction to meet student groups’ specific needs. During small group professional learning sessions, we discuss assessment results to drive instruction for ENLs. The results of these assessments are updated multiple times throughout the school year to drive instruction. Based on their June 2018 data, most ENLs fall below standard in their reading levels. We take note of this, and support them in moving up benchmark levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Benchmark dates are set from the beginning of the school year to keep teachers on track with the TCRWP assessments and students' levels are added to a spread sheet that is shared on a google document and shared with the data specialist and teachers on our school google drive. The data specialist then compiles the data and formulates charts and sets grade meetings so teachers can analyze their student progress and discuss strategies that work and strategies that they can try. Every other Monday, time is set aside for inquiry group meetings so that teachers along with the ENL teachers can analyze and discuss student progress and plan accordingly. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program both qualitatively and quantitatively. Qualitatively, we observe students informally and note their strengths and areas of growth academically. Through asking questions and discussion we monitor student understanding and progress during each lesson (Danielson's Framework - 3b and 3d); this allows us to assess whether or not our program is effective and useful for students. Quantitatively, we analyze movement according to the NYSESLAT across proficiency levels (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding), also noting how many students exit the program. At the beginning of the year we also look at their State ELA and Math exam data and compare it to subsequent periodic assessments. Additionally, we engage in inquiry work, discussing students’ progress on classroom assessments with classroom teachers. As part of our alignment process with the Common Core State Standards, all students, including ENLs, must complete ELA performance tasks that embody the level of rigor present in the standards. Baseline assessments in core content areas are administered and the results for ENL students are compared to final content area assessments in the Spring. All this data is used to evaluate the success of our program for ENLs. We continue to reflect on our teaching (Danielson's Framework - 4a) to see how the ENL instruction can be revised and improved. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order to address interventions once summative data has been gathered, ENL teachers confer with the classroom teachers and discuss their observations, strategies implemented, and discuss other strategies and scaffolds that may benefit each specific student. After implementation and observation of new strategies and supports, the teachers monitor for progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] To provide ELLs with rigorous instruction, a strong Response to Intervention (RTI) model has been established at our school. When ELLs are targeted for needing additional support, the Response to Intervention framework is applied. It’s important to refer to the RTI framework so that struggling ELLs aren’t initially mislabeled as SWDs. However, if academic data reflects that students are not responding well to universal instructional practices (Tier 1), then small group targeted interventions are used to support the child (Tier 2). Teachers refer to TCRWP data, periodic assessment data, and classroom observations and assessments to help evaluate a student’s needs. If Tier 2 interventions are not sufficient, then intensive individual interventions are applied (Tier 3). 2018-19 CEP 69  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Across the grades, the highest percentage of students are at the expanding level (44%), followed by the transitioning level (28%), then entering (15%) and finally emerging level (13%). Incoming Kindergarten students' proficiency levels will be determined by the NYSITELL which will be administered in September 2018. First, second, and third grades are made up of primarily expanding students. Third grade had the highest number of students achieving at the commanding level. Over half of the ELLs in the middle school are at the commanding level. While it is hard to directly compare how students progressed from last year to this year based on the change in the leveling system, some conclusions can be drawn from general movement across the levels. Please see the table below. Movement from Spring 2016 to Spring 2017 Moved Up Stayed the Same Went Down Grades 1-2 48% 40% 12% Grades 3-4 13% 78% 10% Grades 5-6 44% 50% 6% Grades 7-8 42% 54% 4% 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data specialist meets on a monthly basis with teachers from each grade to analyze the data. Together with the ENL teachers, Classroom teachers meet to discuss individual students and come up with strategies and scaffolds that would meet the needs of each student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We currently have three certified ENL teachers at P.S./I.S. 192: John DeRiso, Sin Ting Liang, and Angela Tavarez. Due to the overwhelming response by parents on the parent selection survey, we have implemented a freestanding ENL program which incorporates the integrated/stand-alone model of instruction. All services are provided as per the new regulations for units and types of services based on the five proficiency levels. Through the integrated model, the ENL teacher works with ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with the regular classroom teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support while retaining content instructional time. Through the stand-alone model, students are brought together from various classes for English acquisition focused instruction based on literacy and content topics. This allows us to engage ELLs through linguistically relevant literature and teach rigorously in the different content areas. Overall, classes in our school are heterogeneously grouped on each grade level; as such, when we integrate instruction in the classroom, the ELL population is also heterogeneously grouped. When providing stand-alone instruction students groups are formed homogeneously based on proficiency level (primarily entering and emerging student groupings). In the upper grades, ELL students from two consecutive grades are also mixed to form stand-alone groups. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 70  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in grades K-8 at the entering and emerging levels of English proficiency are supported by receiving 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students at the transitioning and expanding levels receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students at the commanding level of proficiency receive 90 minutes a week for two years after they achieve commanding status. Because these services are mandated, these time allotments are built into the students’ schedules throughout the school day. ENL teachers deliver these services in small groups using the integrated/stand-alone model of instruction dictated by the PART 154-2 Regulations. During integrated services, there are always two available teachers to work with students, with the ENL teacher collaborating within the content area to supplement with language support. All ENLs additionally receive 180 minutes of ELA instruction over the course of each week that is provided by their classroom teachers or the middle school ELA teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Through the integrated model of ENL, we work collaboratively with the classroom teachers to address the various needs of the ELLs. To differentiate instruction, the ENL teacher brings in various materials to incorporate into the lesson (e.g. picture cards, big books, graphic organizers). Classrooms have extensive libraries that are leveled for appropriate and appealing book choices for our ELLs, including bilingual dictionaries. Native language picture books in various genres are also available in the ENL classrooms. Through the stand-alone model, ENL concepts and strategies are taught through literature and content area topics. We emphasize vocabulary development with visual support from picture cards/iPads and authentic literary contexts. We also address phonics needs through Words Their Way word study. Based on the Teachers College Reading and Writing project, ELLs also develop their writing through various genres. Instruction is differentiated based on their needs and abilities, with more scaffolding for our entering and emerging students as needed. Additionally, scaffolding strategies are used for our ELLs' academic development. A TPR (Total Physical Response) approach is implemented in the lower grades to help our newly arrived immigrants develop receptive language. Students are encouraged to use bilingual dictionaries to help them improve their vocabulary acquisition. Newcomers who are literate in their native language are encouraged to respond in that language until they acquire sufficient written English language skills. In addition, ELL instruction is aligned with the citywide instructional expectations and the Common Core State Standards to enhance the rigor level of content learned. The ENL teachers will support the classroom teacher to engage all ELLs in rigorous tasks, embedded in well-crafted instructional units. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Upon enrollment students who speak Spanish are administered the Spanish LAB to evaluate their proficiency in Spanish. Additionally, when considering our newcomers in the testing grades (grades 3-8) every year we evaluate the child's dominance in their home language through reading and speaking in order to determine if they would benefit from a translated edition of the state exams. Also, throughout the year bilingual paraprofessionals are utilized to assist with and evaluate students in their native languages as needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 71  5a. When we have SIFE students, the ENL teacher would work with these students on basic literacy skills and school competencies. This includes teaching the alphabet, basic vocabulary through repetition, modeling, use of visuals, etc. Our school guidance counselor and psychologists are available for support in order to help these students make an easier transition to our school. Additionally, we will stress the need for SIFE students to attend after-school sessions as well as summer school. 5b. Specific and special instruction must be designed to meet the needs of newcomer students. According to current research, it takes approximately 3-5 years for second language learners to acquire Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) and 7-10 years to acquire Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Since newcomers are at the lower levels of English language acquisition we stress activation of prior knowledge, phonemic awareness, TPR, repetition, retelling, and vocabulary and utilize big books, songs, chants, and poetry. Students who are literate in their L1 are encouraged to respond in their native language until they acquire sufficient written English language skills. We also plan to offer an after-school program for our new immigrants. Research has also shown that newcomer programs help to support the adjustment of immigrant students to the language and schooling of their new country. Additionally, during after school programs we hope to utilize Imagine Learning, a technology based program which is a fully interactive, step-by-step language acquisition program that assesses students' current language abilities and provides activities that address areas of needed development. As per ESSA (Every Student Succeeds Act), newcomers who enter a public school in the United States are required to take the Math and content area exams. Additionally, all ELLs are required to take the ELA Exam after two full years of enrollment. In order to help these students meet the new mandates and expectations of the Common Core State Standards, ENL teachers incorporate content area topics during ENL instruction. Specifically in regard to math, we provide vocabulary and comprehension assistance to our ELLs when pushing into the classrooms in alignment with the Go Math curriculum. P.S./I.S. 192 hope to offer after-school test prep for the NYSESLAT. When available, newcomers are given the option to take formal assessments in native language versions. In preparation for the NYSESLAT, ENL teachers plan to use various test prep resources during an after school program. 5c. To instruct and challenge developing ELLs, the ENL staff works collaboratively with the classroom and content area teachers to differentiate instruction. This allows us to evaluate the students’ strengths and weaknesses and plan our lessons accordingly. As part of teacher best practices, we strive to ensure that all instruction is data driven and based on formal and informal assessments. After analyzing the NYSESLAT and ELA scores from Spring 2017 we found that most students struggle primarily with reading and writing, and to some extent listening comprehension. Therefore, we will emphasize helping them understand procedures and written directions, story elements and key vocabulary, collecting and interpreting data from unfamiliar texts, making inferences, making predictions, asking questions, using schema, evaluating information, ideas and opinions in texts, determining meaning of unfamiliar words through context clues, identifying information that is implied rather then stated, and using specific evidence from stories to describe characters, actions, and sequence. 5d. Currently, we have long term ELLs (more than 6 years of ENL services), some of whom are SWDs. The ENL teachers enhance their instruction with small group attention, guided reading, repetition, and graphic organizers. Most students in this category struggle primarily with reading and writing, therefore we focus instruction on learning through authentic literature contexts. In the spring, we plan to offer a NYSESLAT prep after school program to help students reach proficiency in English. 5e. Former ELLs who achieved commanding status in the last 2 years continue to receive 90 minutes of language support throughout the week through the integrated model of instruction. They also receive the extended time accommodation on all state exams. Each year, we generate a list of students to whom this is applied and submit it to the testing coordinator. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We currently have 68 students with special needs, which is approximately 33% of our ELL population. These students receive intensive interventions, monitoring for results during small group literacy instruction. Due to the fact that most of our special education students have not met the performance standards in reading or writing, we will continue assist these students in these modalities. The IEP teachers use TCRWP which provides a workshop model that scaffolds and helps students 2018-19 CEP 72  develop comprehension skills. These teachers collaborate with classroom teachers and integrate instruction to meet the needs of SWDs. They also use Fundations Phonics Program, which is a multi-sensory reading, writing, and spelling program using explicit systematic instruction. Reading Rescue is another program used to support students. Teachers are constantly engaged in examining student work to better design and implement instruction that supports college and career readiness. The ENL teachers will assist them with strategies for pre-writing, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing. This allows students to focus on one task at a time and receive feedback from conferences and peers. We found that our special needs students need additional assistance with the following strategies: organizing, paragraphing, sentence variety, order of ideas, spelling, grammar, and punctuation. During the reading workshop, we will form guided reading groups and focus on key vocabulary and reading comprehension. At all times, we strive to ensure that the materials (stories, non fiction texts, picture cards, etc.) with which students interact are grade level appropriate. This requires meaningful differentiation in order to maintain the rigor level of academic content. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S./I.S. 192 we always strive to ensure ELL-SWDs are incorporated within mainstream classes and instruction, providing them with a learning environment that is least restrictive. Teachers thoughtfully consider the creation and modification of students’ IEPs in order to provide them with the services they need. Some of our ELL-SWDs are placed in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes while others are in 12:1 classrooms, in both cases with teachers holding Special Education licenses. Curriculum and instruction are aligned with the Common Core State Standards and state wide instructional expectations. In order to maintain a learning environment that is less restrictive for SWDs in 12:1 classrooms, all ENL teachers utilize the integrated model of instruction at P.S./I.S. 192. This allows us to collaborate with their content area teachers, reinforce language and vocabulary development, and preserve students’ social comfort ability among their peers. ELL-SWDs in ICT classes are at times pulled out for ENL instruction, learning with a small group of peers that constitutes a mix of GE students and SWDs. This allows for social interaction and academic collaboration and growth among all students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After reviewing the NYSESLAT, we target our transitioning and expanding ELLs who are close to achieving proficiency so that they are more likely to exit the ENL program. We also focus our work with newcomer ELLs because they need significant support in all four language modalities in order to catch up with their peers. Of course, we strive to provide meaningful language and academic support to students at all levels. During integrated and stand-alone instruction we incorporate a wide variety of non fiction texts (Language Power resources, National Geographic leveled books, and Write Time) to align and support content area instruction. Also as an intervention for our newcomers we offer a 16 session after school program in the winter to support their basic language acquisition needs. The IEP and SETSS teachers also push into classrooms and collaborate with classroom teachers to meet the needs of ELLs. At times they also pull students out to work in small groups. Depending on the content area, they provide specific assistance regarding new and reviewed content. They also use the TCRWP and Reading Rescue which provide systematic, scaffolded instruction that uses reciprocal teaching and graphic organizers to develop comprehension strategies. The classroom teachers use the Fundations Phonics Program, which is a multi-sensory reading, writing, and spelling program that use explicit systematic instruction for small groups. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we plan to incorporate "National Geographic Learning" with our stand-alone groups that we pull out for entering and emerging students. The program has leveled literature across the various genres. It emphasizes vocabulary in context with visual supports as well as comprehension questions. Students have plenty of opportunities to practices and reinforce what they have learned. When we receive the ELA units from Teacher's College we will continue to adapt the units to meet the specific needs of our ELLs. We will also continue to use Language Power to support students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 CEP 73  During the 2017-2018 school year, we had a bilingual Mandarin Kindergarten class. As the year went on, the majority of the students returned to their zone school with only ten students remaining at our school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENLs are integrated into all levels of the curriculum at P.S./I.S.192. Students receive ELA, math, science, and social studies instruction across the grades. We offer programs in art, music, music and movement, physical education, and Career Readiness for all of our students. All teachers are considerate about the special needs of ELL students and ensure that their instruction provides multiple pathways for ELLs to engage in instruction and learning activities. Many extracurricular activities are made available to all students, such as ballroom dancing, CHAMPS character and sports program, and various arts residencies. For example, last year during school performances ENLs took leading roles in drama, dance, and music performances. Notification letters sent home regarding these programs are written in English, Spanish, Russian, and Chinese. Additionally a translation stamp accompanies each letter to direct parents to contact the school with further questions. We hope to also offer test prep to our ELLs as an after school program for all major state exams, including the NYSESLAT exam. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials used for our ELL population include: • Leveled and thematic classroom libraries, including big books • Bilingual and Native language libraries in the ENL classroom (Spanish, Russian, Urdu, Arabic, Polish, Bengali, Chinese) • English and Bilingual/Native language dictionaries (Spanish, Russian, Arabic, Uzbek, Polish, Chinese • "Write Time" – for newcomers in an after-school program • "Finish Line" – focusing on the four modalities to assist in test preparation for grades K-8 • Language Power/National Geographic Learning - vocabulary instruction differentiated across the grades • Readers Theatre for fluency and comprehension used across the grades • Imagine Learning – technology based language acquisition program for grades K-8 (native language used as a instructional support • Assistive Technology: Smart Board, iPads, laptops 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At this time, we do not have a dual language class in the building. However, students who are literate in their L1 are encouraged to respond in their native language until they acquire sufficient written English language skills. Since literacy skills in L1 facilitate the development of L2 literacy, we encourage our classroom teachers to allow the use of L1 in all necessary and appropriate contexts, for example referring to common cognates. When possible, newcomers are paired with students who speak their native language and have a command of English. Additionally, we have bilingual picture dictionaries/books of the languages spoken in our school available in various languages located in the ENL classrooms. Classroom teachers have free access to utilize these resources for their ELL population. Classroom teachers with multilingual knowledge are encouraged to refer to other languages when students need additional direction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Classrooms have extensive libraries that are leveled for appropriate and appealing book choices for our ENL students across the grades. Additionally, newcomers who are still limited in their ability to read in English have access to books in other classrooms that are more appropriate according to their reading level. ENL classrooms also have leveled libraries. The ENL teachers work within specific, continuous grade bands so as to improve their ability to collaborate with classroom teachers and better serve ENL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Materials used for our ELL population include: • Leveled and thematic classroom libraries, including big books • Bilingual and Native language libraries in the ENL classroom (Spanish, Russian, Urdu, Arabic, Polish, Bengali, Chinese) 2018-19 CEP 74  • English and Bilingual/Native language dictionaries (Spanish, Russian, Arabic, Uzbek, Polish, Chinese • "Finish Line" – focusing on the four modalities to assist in test preparation for grades K-8 • Language Power/National Geographic Learning - vocabulary instruction differentiated acrosss the grades • Readers Theatre for fluency and comprehension used across the grades • Imagine Learning – technology based language acquisition program for grades K-8 (native language used as a instructional support) • Assistive Technology: Smart Board, iPads, laptops 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teachers consult with the Pupil Accounting Secretary for a list of students who register in the spring through June for the following school year who might be eligible for language services. Once the students have been identified as ELLs, they are eligible for After School Programs that specifically target newcomers' needs. As new students continue to register over the course of the year, we provide foundational language support in the areas of phonics and vocabulary. Bilingual Paraprofessionals also consistently support with translation and interpretation as needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish as a foreign language school wide. ELLs have equal access to this language learning opportunity. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers receive continued ELL specific professional development. ELL Consultant from C.I.T.E. will visit our school for extended sessions to provide support in the following areas for both teachers and Assistant Principals: differentiating for newcomers, student-centered instruction, collaboration, and ENL “Best Practices”. Additionally, ENL teachers attend numerous workshops provided by the newly formed Borough Field Support Center Staff (formerly CFN 409) on ELL related topics. Also, once a month ELL teachers attend in-house TC staff development sessions for teachers and Assistant Principals to support literacy instruction. Staff Developers include Marie Mounteer (K-2), Alexandra Roman (3-5), Pablo Wolfe (6-8). ENL teachers also attend TC workshops at the Teacher's College in Columbia University that are specifically tailored to working with ELLs. At times across the year, ELL teachers also provide professional development for their colleagues on ELL specific topics. During the professional learning sessions each week, ELL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers and administrators to improve teacher instruction and student learning. Finally, at the beginning of the year a formal training on registration and screening procedures was led by the ENL teachers for paraprofessionals and secretaries. Staff members have attended several sessions regarding incorporating and utilizing the new standards (language progressions) to drive instruction. All additional meetings and professional development sessions that are attended by our ENL teachers will be turn-keyed to the rest of the ENL teaching team and then to the teachers with whom they work. The Department of Education provides a menu of workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners (OELL). These workshops focus on effective instructional strategies integrating language learning across the curriculum as it is aligned with 2018-19 CEP 75  the Common Core Standards. Activities include breaking down the standards and brainstorming specific ENL scaffolds and observing models of highly effective teaching. We also encourage teachers working with ELLs to research and attend professional development sessions focusing on ELLs that are specific to their needs and concerns. We will continue to offer in-house staff development on how to utilize ENL strategies to our general and special education teachers and paraprofessionals during professional learning sessions over the course of the year. We also encourage our guidance counselors, psychologists, speech therapists, occupational/physical therapists, parent coordinator, and secretaries to attend. Professional development sessions will entail demonstration lessons tailored to an ELL population, ENL methodologies in the content area and differentiated instruction. Lessons will consist of the unique needs of ELLs as they simultaneously acquire language and literacy skills in the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Facilitators from Teachers College provide in-house professional development for elementary grade teachers and ENL staff members. They demonstrate various strategies within the units of reading and writing to meet the challenge of the Common Core Standards, with specific attention on our ELL students engaging in rigorous learning. Debriefing sessions are held before and after lessons that they model in lab-site classrooms. Some sessions are focused directly on how to support ENL students within literacy development. Teachers also have the opportunity to attend workshops held at Teachers College to strengthen their understanding and implementation of the units of study in reading and writing. Additionally, last year we had ELL consultants come into our classrooms for multiple sessions to support teachers with numerous ELLs in their rooms. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL team collaborate with teachers to help them become aware of students’ backgrounds as they transition from one grade to the next. We all work together to ensure that students are comfortable in the new setting, for example by providing at least one other student in their class who speaks the same native language. To support staff members, we provide ample literacy resources for their low-level ELLs and in addition we turn-key "best practices" gleaned from professional development sessions attended by the ENL teachers. We also communicate with the school counselor about concerning issues. When 8th graders go through the process of applying for high school, our guidance counselors meet with students one-on-one to help them determine their best options. These students are also encouraged to attend high school orientations. When necessary, particularly for newcomers, interpreters are made available to help them understand their options. The guidance counselor also leads a parent workshop providing parents with information regarding the transition to high school and the application process. In the past we have had consultants come in to provide support for teachers who are new to teaching ELLs or who have a significant number of ELLs in the room. For the ENL teachers we often attend professional development provided by the Network to help us better meet the needs of our ELLs. At the beginning of the year, teachers are provided with a memo informing them that it is their responsibility to keep track of all professional development that they receive, including information about the ELL-specific mandates (15% for general teachers and 50% for ELL teachers). When teachers attend external professional development sessions they complete a form afterwards informing the payroll secretary and administrators of the event that they attended and possible opportunities for turn-keying the information. School administers keep a binder of all in house professional development sessions including agendas, sign-in sheets, and handouts. At the end of the year, teachers document the number of hours of professional development that are contributing toward the mandated 175 hours using the "175 Professional Development Tracking Form". Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every Tuesday, time is devoted for teachers to reach out to parents regarding students' progress and needs. ENL teachers meet with parents individually as well as collaborate with classroom teachers to engage parents. At beginning of the year, we 2018-19 CEP 76  plan to reach out to 3-5 families a week to discuss our program, language development, their NYSESLAT results, and how families can further support their students. At all meetings, translation is provided as needed through the use of our trained bilingual paraprofessionals. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. When offering meetings for parents of ELLs (particularly the annual meeting in addition to Parent Teacher Conferences), invitation letters are distributed in both English and Spanish and are accompanied by a multilingual stamp providing more information to parents of other languages. At the meetings, parents sign in and are given an agenda and handouts for the sessions. Bilingual paraprofessionals are present to provide translation support for parents who don't speak English. Copies of all relevant paperwork are kept in a file in the ENL Room. Additionally, all ELL teachers have logs of phone calls that are made to parents through-out the week, particularly on Tuesday afternoons during the parent engagement sessions. In order to encourage parental involvement, we invite parents to attend formal and informal events. The ENL team offers workshops to help parents know how to better support their children academically. We plan to lead parent sessions during the fall, winter and spring separated according to the lower grades (K-4) and upper grades (5-8). Our school sends all official school correspondence in both English and Spanish, and other languages as needed. The translation stamp written in multiple languages is also printed on each letter home directing parents of other languages to reach out for more information if needed. We provide translation services during Parent-Teacher conferences by utilizing our Parent Coordinator and bilingual staff members. Throughout the school year, the PTA along with the Parent Coordinator hosts family night events such as arts and crafts, pajama night, and chorus and band assemblies to encourage fellowship and collaboration between our parents and school staff. Our parents are involved and consulted at multiple levels, primarily through the PTA and its functions, publishing parties, open school week, general assemblies and concerts, multicultural food festivals, book fairs, fund raising activities, and Urban Advantage trip and through the School Leadership Team. Activities include movie nights, pumpkin decorating, seasonal crafts, and science nights. The parent coordinator plans these events, reaches out to parents regarding school events, and fields parent concerns. She also manages the school website, monthly newsletter, Remind app and School Messenger to keep families involved. (Messages are also sent by parents' specific language). She also assists with new student registration at the beginning of the year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 77 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Liset Isaac, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 78  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S./I.S. 192 School DBN: 20K192 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Liset Isaac Title Principal Catherine Campanella Assistant Principal Yolanda Fioriello Parent Coordinator Angela Tavarez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nadire Jasari Parent Natalia Diamantakos Teacher/Subject Area Diana Mejia-Linares Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Marina D'Aniello School Counselor Karina Constantino Lucia Perez-Medina N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lucia Perez-Medina Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 N/A N/A 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 79  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K192 School Name: PS/IS 192 Superintendent: K.Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yolanda N/A Fioriello N/A Parent Coordinator N/A Yes N/A Yes N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At P.S./I.S. 192 our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs are addressed by our Parent Coordinator, ENL staff, bilingual staff, and classroom teachers. To ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a comprehensible language, we evaluate the languages spoken by all of our students’ families by referring to biographical ATS reports (RPOB and RHLA). These reports provide a break down by grade of the number of students who speak each language represented in our student body. Language listings in ATS are based on the Home Language Identification Survey that are completed at the time of student enrollment. The Home Language Survey, along with an informal interview with the assistance of interpreters as needed, help us determine the language(s) spoken at home. It also includes a question asking in which language parents prefer written and oral communication to take place. When parents complete the "blue cards" at the start of each year updating their child's biographical information, language preferences are also noted. 2018-19 CEP 80  Additionally, we provide an opportunity for our parents to request an interpreter prior to scheduled parent-teacher conferences and other individualized meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parents at our school with to communicate in English, Spanish, Russian, Mandarin, . Tajik, Uzbek, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, and Ukrainian English 26% English Spanish 38% Spanish Russian 12% Russian Mandarin 8% Mandarin 16% Tajik, Uzbek, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, and Ukrainian Tajik, Uzbek, Arabic, Bengali, Urdu, and Ukrainian 26% 38% 12 % 8% 16% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, Russian, English, Chinese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 81  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Many of these notices are distributed at the beginning of the school year or at the time of the event. The documents that are sent home in this fashion include but are not limited to welcome letters, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, NY State testing dates, invitations for school performances and special assemblies, the annual school survey, IEP meeting letters, middle and high school admission forms, lunch room policies, and all school wide notices and special events. Also, all registration forms and ELL related entitlement/non-entitlement letters and forms are provided in the ten available translated editions. plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All written communication that is sent home is provided in both English and Spanish and is accompanied by a stamp with a message written in eight languages directing parents to reach out to the school for oral interpretation as needed. Our Parent Coordinator translates all flyers and notices that are sent home in Spanish. Various letters and notifications of importance are sent out for translation in Russian, Mandarin, and Arabic and then sent 2018-19 CEP 82  Family-Fun-Night invitations, classroom newsletters, school event calendars, Monthly calendars and flyers are sent home indicating upcoming events. home with students. Parents who are signed up, received messages and reminders via school messenger in their native language. Staff members who speak various languages assist with translations for parent phone calls and parent meetings regarding documents. All written communication that is sent home is provided in both English and Spanish and is accompanied by a stamp with a message written in eight languages directing parents to reach out to the school for oral interpretation 2018-19 CEP 83  as needed. Our Parent Coordinator translates all flyers and notices that are sent home in Spanish. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conferences (September), parent-teacher conferences (November, March, and May), Parent Teacher Conferences: September, November, March and May provide interpretation service(s)? Translators (staff members) are available to translate for parent teacher conferences. A translator schedule is created prior to the the date so that meetings can take place in a timely fashion. Family-Fun-Nights (monthly), PTA meetings, Student of the Month Assemblies, Parent Engagement Time Classroom publishing parties, IEP meetings, student behavior meetings, school performances and special assemblies, school leadership team meetings, etc. Monthly PTA meetings and Family Fun Nights Translators (staff members) are available to translate Every Tuesday from 2:30-3:15 is designated parent engagement time. Translators (staff members) are available to translate Throughout the year as scheduled by classroom teachers and staff members. Translators (staff members) are available to translate. A school messenger is sent out to all families in their own language to notify and remind them of the school event. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of an emergency, a school messenger will be sent out to all families in their own language, letters will be sent home that are translated by staff members, and phone calls will be made by staff that speak the same language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 CEP 84  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A professional learning session will be held to inform all staff members of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and what resources are available on a Monday afternoon during Professional Learning time. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) A parent orientation meeting will be held in the beginning of the school to inform parents about their rights to receive information in their language. Notices will go home and the topic will be included on monthly PTA meeting agendas. As per Section VII of Chancellor's Regularions of A-663, PS/IS 192 provides translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. For all programs, services, and information critical to students’ education we will continue to use the written translation services of covered languages provided by the Department of Education, the Parent Coordinator, and other in-house school staff to provide timely translation. All official written correspondence is provided in both English and Spanish and accompanied by a multilingual stamp directing parents to request additional translation if needed. For example, all entitlement letters for ELLs’ parents are sent out in their respective native languages. Official Department of Education documents such as the The Guide for Parents of English Language Learners utilized during orientation and the Student Behavior Contract are also provided in parents’ native languages. At any point, interpretation services at group and one-on-one meetings are provided upon request when such services are necessary for parents to communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse and/or other school staff regarding critical information about their child’s education. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Annually parents take a school survey with questions regarding how the school is run, the quality of communication, availability of staff members, etc. The results of this survey are reviewed and changes are made as necessary. Also, informally, the parent coordinator and staff members receive parent feedback on how to communicate better. The Parent Teacher Association also gathers and synthesizes parent concerns about the school to present to the School Leadership Team and school administrators. 2018-19 CEP 85 
