2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 22K194 School Name: P.S. 194 RAOUL WALLENBERG Principal: JOY MENDELSOHN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 194 RaoulWallenberg 22K194 School Number (DBN): 332200010194 Pre K- 5 3117 Avenue W Brooklyn, NY 11229 718-648-8804 Phone Number: 718-934-0244 Fax: Joy Mendelsohn Jmendel2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Email Address: Joy Mendelsohn Diane Broth Jessica Edouard Diane Broth PatraBrown n/a n/a District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11229 Superintendent’s Office Address: jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6117 Phone Number: 718-968-6252 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Field Support FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: MauriciereDe Govia Executive Director: 415 89th street Brooklyn, New York mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-459-4862 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joy Mendelsohn Diane Broth Jessica Edouard Sheila Catanese N/A N/A Elizabeth Ahern Kathryn Kelly *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carmen Persico William Mauras SaaimaMansoor Monique Tillery KhayriyyahJones PersisMay Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of P.S. 194 the Raoul Wallenberg School is to develop students who are empowered with the skills to communicate, cooperate, connect, embrace diversity and resolve conflict in order to become independent thinkers and lifelong learners. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 194, The Raoul Wallenberg School is a Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5, multi-ethnic, multi-lingual school located in the Sheepshead Bay area of Brooklyn, New York. Our building houses classes from Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5. We have four (4) Pre-Kindergarten classes, four (4) self-contained Special Education classes and nine (9) Collaborative Team Teaching classes. P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg is a professional learning community that is dedicated and committed to the vision that all children, whatever their starting point, will show significant academic growth within a safe, supportive and caring environment. Our expectation is that every staff member will do whatever it takes to help every child achieve success within an academically rigorous environment. Engaging students in learning, and the pervasive focus on student achievement, permeates every activity within the school. Academic rigor has been prioritized in all areas of the curriculum, and we maintain a commitment to providing Arts education to all students. The Arts-rich, interdisciplinary curriculum offers a program that connects music, visual arts and dance to literature, social studies, math and language arts. Student progress is carefully tracked for all students - General Education students, students with disabilities and English Language Learners. Any student identified as at-risk for not meeting State Standards will receive highly effective differentiated tiered intervention services within the classroom to ensure on-going progress. These students will be invited to an After School Program which will be structured in a smaller classroom environment to focus in on the needed skills to provide remediation. P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg has many programs which enrich academic, social and emotional needs of our students. Special programs at our school include Sanford Harmony, Read-Aloud, Penny Harvest, City Harvest, CookShop for students, CookShop for families, Making Books Sing and Dance events. In addition, we have partnered with the Flatbush Avenue Afterschool Y program, housed in our building, Monday through Friday from 2:40 pm to 5:40 pm for 150 Kindergarten to Grade 5 students. This program provides enrichment activities, art activities, physical education and homework help for all participants. We are also partnered with the Kingsbay Y Afterschool Program that provides academic assistance and enrichment programs for 60 Kindergarten to Grade 5 students located offsite. 2018-19 CEP 10  We have a strong home/school partnership, and parents play an active role in our school. Family Literacy Programs, Violin, Trumpet and Trombone performances, after-hour theater performances, Family Reading events, Family Computer, Family Math, Science and Field Day are among the activities that solidify the bonds between home and school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. One of the challenges we are facing is the growing number of students with special needs, including students with Individualized Education Plans. We are working towards creating an environment that fosters learning for all populations while building capacity in the classroom to help teachers develop a toolbox of strategies to support our school community as a whole. In the 2016-2017 NYS School Report Card our SWD's had an increase of 8% in the NYS Math Assessment and a 5% increase in the NYS ELA Assessment. This identifies our need to continue to maintain our progress with our SWD's. Another challenge we face is the growing number of students whose first language is not English. In the 2016-2017 NYS School Report Card our ELL's had a decrease of 13% performance on the NYS ELA Assessment, this identified our need of language development. We have hired a second ESL teacher in order to provide the mandated services that these students require. We will be utilizing a push in model to support the needs of these students and the needs of their classroom teachers. In addition, we will be working towards making sure that all school correspondence is translated into the students home languages. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. All of our efforts are designed to meet the needs of our students. The manner in which we have improved the quality of instruction for our students who are in most need has been evolving in a positive direction. We are making progress in closing the achievement gap and student performance. This was evident in the 2016-2017 School Report Card with an increase of 5% of our students with disabilities scoring proficient on the NYS ELA Assessment. In 2016, 6% SWD's were scoring at Level 3/4 and in 2017, 11% SWD's were scoring at Level 3/4. In addition, there was an increase of 8% of students with disabilities scoring proficient on the NYS Math Assessment. In 2016, 2% SWD's were scoring at Level 3/4 and in 2017 10% were scoring at Level 3/4. P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg continues to make great strides with our school-based relationships as evidenced by the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide in which there was an increase of 3% in building relationships of trust and respect between administration, educators and families. Trust being one of the six areas of school conditions and practices in the Framework for Great Schools that drive improved student learning. The school leadership has created extensive opportunities for collaboration and professional development opportunities for staff which led to Development of Teacher Pedagogy (1.2) becoming an Area of Celebration as evidenced by in our 2016-2017 Quality Review Report. The schools instructional team engages in ongoing professional development and collaborations. School leaders and teacher teams assume mutual accountability for meeting expectations. Weekly professional development opportunities include topics such as the Danielson Framework and strategies for English Language Learners. Our Instructional Focus: To develop a culture of collaborative learning that enables all students including our ELLs and SWDs to increase their vocabulary development deepening student comprehension skills and promoting language development. Specifically, our key areas of focus for 2018-2019 are as follows: Implementation of a new reading and writing program and Engage NY/Eureka Math incorporating checklists, rubrics, pre-mid-post assessments and differentiated learning activities. Other key elements include students setting goals, self assessing using checklists and 2018-19 CEP 11  rubrics with teachers giving actionable feedback. A critical part of creating these Units of Study is teacher collaboration and team planning. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K194 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 590 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 40 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 27 3 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 85.3% % Reduced Lunch 11.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 19.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 22.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.17 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 79% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 78 78 27 90.8% 1.0% 23.9% 46.1% 10.8% 1.2% 2 5% 6.4 34.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In collaboration with one of the District goals to increase mathematics performance our school we will continue to implement the math program Eureka/Engage NY. This program will provide the teachers with the knowledge and tools necessary to implement the important instructional shifts required by the Next Generation Learning Standards. The demands of the Common Core require a shift in curricula, assessment and in teacher instruction to better prepare students with the knowledge and skills they need for future success. Analysis of 2017-2018 NYS Math student performance data showed that our school had an increase from the previous year due to the infusion of the Engage NY lessons as well as on the spot math assessments done by the teachers which led to additional small group instruction. In addition, grades 2-5 incorporated a problem solving plan into all math blocks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in K-5 student performance on Eureka/Engage NY school based math interim assessments as evidenced by a 2% increase in students scoring at or above proficiency Level 3/4 on End of Year Interim Assessment. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Teachers, Data Specialist, teachers, ESL provider, IEP Teacher Continued professional development with focus on multiple entry points for all learners and student engagement All teachers Monthly September 2018- June 2019 ● English as a New Language provider meets bi-weekly with teacher teams on strategies to support English Language Learners such strategies include: Math vocabulary word walls with pictures to support ELLs Learning, Use of manipulatives to scaffold learning of mathematical concepts ● Individualized Evaluation Plan teacher conducts Professional Learning for special education providers on techniques to engage and improve students with disabilities academic achievement such techniques include use of word banks, use of manipulatives -Grade teacher teams will meet weekly to review data and plan units of study -Integration and use of technology whenever possible to increase student engagement including : IXL Computer Based Programs Formal and Informal Observations with feedback and individual teacher professional learning opportunities including next steps for impact ● Administration meets weekly to reflect on Advance feedback; notes effectiveness of feedback; uses data to plan Professional Learning Opportunities All teachers monthly Administration September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 15 All teachers weekly Administration, Classroom teachers September 2018- June 2019 ● The focus this year for Administration and staff is “How did my lesson impact student learning?” Reflection on our impact on student achievement is used as data to move student achievement Administration along with the school cabinet will collect and review monthly math student writing samples. Continued implementation of Common Core aligned mathematics curriculum- math fluency, problem solving through the use of Eureka/Engage NY Professional Learning Opportunities designed to improve the depth of questioning and discussion technique to deepen student achievement in all curriculum content areas especially mathematics. ● Math stems and question prompts are used in math classes to enhance the implementation of the mathematical practices -- Implementation of a new school wide Eureka/Engage NY math program -- Incorporated IXL Technology Program -- Afterschool Program for Grades 3-5 Reading and Math -- Implementation of Problem Solving Strategies in Math Classrooms on a selected school day -- Implementation of Number Talks in all Math Classrooms ● Monthly Parent engagement activities on math content will be offered to support family. These activities will help parents become more effective participants in their children's education. All teachers Families Monthly Administration, Classroom teachers, Lead Teachers ● Implementation of checklists and rubrics to improve student mathematics is shared with families to support their children at home September 2018- June 2019 ● Math exemplars are shared with families and posters are in classrooms to set clear expectations for staff, children and families Administration of math sprints to support fluency 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September we will host a Welcome Breakfast for parents where we will introduce all school personnel and inform parents of our school's vision for the coming school year. Teachers will have weekly parent meetings during Parent Engagement time informing parents of expectations of the Common Core and how they will help to meet those high standards of instruction for their child. In September the school will host a back to school parent teacher conference night where teachers will meet with parents and inform them of curriculum changes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development Days, teacher sub coverage, classroom materials to increase classroom engagement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 1% increase in K-5 students scoring at or above proficiency Level 3/4 on the Mid-Year Interim Assessment for Eureka/Engage NY. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress will be End of Module Interim Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018 OORS data our school showed a decrease in our high level 4 incident reports in the past three years. In 2015-2016 there were 10 high level 4 incident reports, 2016-2017 there were 4 high level 4 incident reports and in 2017-2018 we had 0 level 4 incidents. Our social emotional program will continue to assist in proactive prevention to incidents and will create a safe and inclusive environment for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 25% of our teachers will be trained in becoming a Culturally Responsive Teacher resulting in a 2% decrease in Level 3 Incident Reports as measured by the OORS data from the previous year 2017-2018. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers and some support staff will be trained in the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Service (TCIS), Just Say Hi and Restorative Justice Classroom Teacher and Support Staff Monthly Administration September 2018- June 2019 Schoolwide Monthly All School Staff Staff will meet as teams to adapt the program to meet the needs of the students in the PS 194 School Community. September 2018 - June 2019 Parent meetings to share the program with the school community. Schoolwide Professional Development will be given on an ongoing basis throughout the school year. During the professional development allotted time teachers will share best practices with their colleagues. Teachers will do intervisitations into each other's classrooms to observe these practices in action. All School Staff, Students September 2018 - June 2019 All School Staff and Parents Monthly All School Staff September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent meetings given by teachers and administrators will be held throughout the school year to explain the social-emotional program adopted by the school. Parents will be receiving monthly updates from teachers on how their child is moving through the program. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Sanford Harmony Program Professional Development TCIS Training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Safety Committee will continue to monitor the implementation of the TCIS strategies and then compare the OORS data from 2017-2018 school year to measure if Level 3 student incidents reports have decreased by 1%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Number of incidents on OORS report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have a shared responsibility for improving student achievement; one of the ways we are continuously striving for student improvement is through our Teacher Teams. Teacher Teams meet continuously to share research based strategies to support better-informed planning that result in effective and highly effective instruction. Analysis of the School Quality Snapshot 2016-2017 showed that our school reached a level of excellent for Closing the Achievement Gap for ELLs in ELA and Math. This data supports our schools effort to continue to plan collaborately and strategically in order to develop lesson plans that provide multiple entry points for all learners especially ELLs. Our Teacher Teams are engaged in data driven instruction that encompasses implementing and revising rigorous tasks and assessments that engage students in critical thinking and developing viable arguments. Our priority is for students to successfully master the Next Generation Learning Standards at a deep comprehension level and be able to transfer their knowledge through discussions and writing in reading and mathematics. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will engage in collaborative professional learning opportunities to align Curriculum that encompasses the need of language acquisition and reading comprehension skills for ELLs as evidenced by an increase of 4% of ELLs showing an increase in reading levels as measured by Fountas and Pinnell. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Participate in professional learning opportunities each Monday and Tuesday, and on Chancellor ‘s conference days in November and June, to share best practices ● A new research-based, comprehensive English Language Arts program entitled Journeys for Reading is used as a resource to support teachers in the implementation of balanced literacy and provides comprehensible input for English Language Support for Emerging, Expanding and Bridging ● English as a New Language provider will collaborate on research based strategies to support English language learners in the classroom; word banks and phrases of desired academic vocabulary is distributed for English language learners and use of Graphic Organizers Teachers will use data protocols to analyze school wide data and Fountas and Pinnell reading data during vertical teacher teams to identify areas of celebration and focus ● Teacher Teams will collect samples of student writing at each performance level; these samples will serve as models of expectations / results at each level. Teams will also include sample next steps that should be given to the student to move their learning forward ● Teacher Teams revise tasks to align to ELA and Math Next Generation Learning Standards. All Teachers, Ell Provider Monthly September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Teachers, ELL provider Lead Teachers All Teachers Monthly Administration, September 2018- June 2019 Teacher, ELL Provider 2018-19 CEP 22  School leaders will develop and implement a school wide inter-visitation plan in order for teachers to collaborate on best practices ● Teacher Teams prepare and present monthly parent engagement activities; teams share exemplary grade level work; share strategies such as word / phrase bank and graphic organizers with all families including families of ELLs ● Student progress is shared on-going and during parent involvement sessions Administration, Teachers, ELL Provider Administration,Teacher Teams, Families Monthly September 2018- June 2019 2018-19 CEP 23 Additional ELL staff was hired to provide mandated services to growing number of ELL students, as well as provide professional development for families. Parents Twice a year ELL Provider September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Professional Development will be provided for all families by our Parent Coordinator, teachers and administrators. School wide events including International Food Festival will be held throughout the year. Letters and notices will be translated into Native Languages with the help of our Language Access Coordinator and translators will be present as requested. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: District support staff, data specialist, lead teachers, administrators Instructional resources: ENL provider, EngageNY videos, data and looking at student work protocols Scheduling Adjustments: Common planning time during the instructional day, Monday and Tuesday PLOs, Grade level Lunch and Learns Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of our teachers will engage in weekly collaborative professional learning opportunities to analyze student work and data to modify curriculum in order to deepen the level of instruction for ELLs as evidenced by 2% of our ELL students moving a level in Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess our progress will be Fountas and Pinnell Reading assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2016-2017 Quality Review report our findings showed that across classrooms teachers created assessments, rubrics and grading policies that are aligned with the school's curricula. Teachers will further their use of assessments by creating questions and assessments that are regularly used to diagnose evidence of learning. Teachers will provide feedback to students that is accurate and specific. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of the teachers observed using the Danielson Framework for Teaching will receive high quality feedback resulting in at least 60% of the teachers rating effective for component 3D in the ADVANCE Teacher Level MOTP Report. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All teachers will receive low inference observations based on their option choice in the beginning of the year initial planning conference and receive feedback from administration to improve use of summative and formative assessments. All teachers will collaboratively engage in Professional Learning Opportunities in Component 3D to improve their HEDI score and thus further impact student outcome. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, All Teachers 3 or 4 times a year Principal, Assistant Principal September 2018- June 2019 Administration, All Teachers Monthly September 2018- June 2019 twice a year September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers Administration, ESL provider, IEP teacher Administration, ESL provider, IEP teacher, Lead Teachers Professional Learning Opportunities will be giving to teachers on providing actionable feedback that will drive instruction. Formative and summative assessments will be used to for lesson planning and grouping. All teachers, para-professionals Parent engagement activities are conducted to model strategies of to support students in comprehending rigorous texts. Future texts in class are the resources for the workshops. Families Monthly September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of all curriculum changes as well as student progress. Teachers will create monthly newsletters informing parents of units of study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 26  Human Resources: Administration, Teachers, data specialists, District level support specialist Instructional Resources: ADVANCE data, professional development materials on DOK, Hess Matrix, training on Danielson’s Framework for administration from NYC talent coach Schedule Adjustments: Schedule Professional Learning Opportunities arranging for inter-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 20% of teachers will be at an effective level in component 3D as evidenced by ADVANCE Teacher Level MOTP report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Teacher Level MOTP Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Based on 2016-2017 School Quality Guide data and our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot our school forms effective partnerships with our families and outside organizations as evidenced by 94% of our parents responding positively to questions about Family and Community ties. We have shown an increase in teacher outreach in our school as evidenced by 95% of our parents responding positively in this category which is an increase shown from 84% in our 2015-2016 School Quality Guide. However, we just met the city average of 90% in parent involvement in our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot and due to this analysis, parent attendance rate at monthly partnership/workshops was identified as a need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in parents responding positively to questions about Family and Community ties as evidenced by a 2% increase in percent rate of parents responding to our school parent survey. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Through open communication and on going needs assessments parents will be invited to be active members in their child’s education. Elections for SLT and PA associations will be conducted in mid September. Parents monthly September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Community Leaders, Community organizations, District support, Parents Association, Parent Coordinator, SLT, Teachers and school support staff Several opportunities will be provided to build capacity for strong parent involvement. Meetings will be scheduled at various times to increase parent attendance. Built in parental involvement Tuesdays for one on one grade meetings and workshops. To increase parent involvement in school meetings and events school staff will engage in parent outreach in the preferred language of our families. Letters, invitations and notices will be translated and events will be scheduled to reflect the rich cultural diversity of the school community and to support English Language Learners. Parents monthly Parent Coordinator, PA, Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Events will be scheduled to celebrate the rich diversity of the school and community. School and Community Monthly September 2018- June 2019 Continue to provided the following parent engagement activities • Grade Orientations, Individual conferences, grade conferences, ELA/Math night, Science night, grade level math workshops, writing celebrations, cultural celebrations, chorus concerts and school plays. School and Community monthly September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Community leaders, Community Organizations, District support, teachers, and school support staff Administration, Community leaders, Community Organizations, District support, teachers, and school support staff 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Association will be changed to Parent Teacher Association to bridge the gap between school and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per diem and per session teacher and administrator lines will be allocated to support the parent engagement activities, LAC parent involvement kits, Engage NY videos Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in attendance rate in parent engagement and involvement activities as evidenced by analysis of attendance sign in sheets Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess the progress of this goal will be the monthly parent engagement sign in sheets and parent surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Test Scores Classroom Performance Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Comprehension Strategies aligned with Next Generation Learning Standards(Literary and Informational Texts) Teacher's College Units of Study for Reading and Writing Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Reader’s Workshop (direct explicit instruction: large group, small group, independent practice) ● Writer’s Workshop (direct explicit instruction: large group, small group, independent practice) ● small group, Independent practice ● Writing aligned withNext Generation Learning Standards ● large group and small group ● Great Leaps – (phonics fluency) small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● during the school day ● during the school day ● Fundations – K & 1 instruction, independent practice ● during the school day NY Ready, Raz-Kids (computer-based program) ● during the school day during the school day and after school 2018-19 CEP 31  Mathematics State Test Scores Classroom Performance Science State scores Social Studies Classroom Performance Referral to SBST At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ●Engage NY/Eureka Math ● push-in services, alternate setting, small group ● during the school day ● Mathletics, and IXLComuterBased Programs ● Number Facts & Raz-Kids NY Ready Content area reading aligned with Next Generation Learning Standards(informational text and inquiry work) Content area reading aligned with Next Generation Learning Standards(informational text and inquiry work ● Discussions (class and small group) ● Crisis Intervention (counseling) as needed ● computer assisted skills development program for individualized instruction ● small group and individualized instruction for diagnostic and prescriptive learning small group instruction ● during the school day and after school during the school day ● during the school day during the school day and after school during the school day small group instruction during the school day ● large and small group class discussions on a rotational basis to support respect and dignity for all ● during the school day ● during the school day ● Counseling one-to-one ● small group and one to one sessions ● Family counseling ● one to one sessions as needed ● during the school day Behavior Modification – meeting with ● one to one sessions as needed ● during the school day 2018-19 CEP 32  Teachers to write BIP’s one to one and small group sessions during the school day 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 53 students in temporary housing attending our school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will be providing highly effective differentiated tiered intervention services within the classroom and counseling will be provided as needed. Also they are provided with school related supplies, clothing items and funding of school trips. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and new teachers. Partnership with Colleges/Universities for student teaching placement (at P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg) and student observation placement (at P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg) to maintain high level of recruitment of effective teachers. Continuing the deep work of collaborative teacher teams to ensure professional growth of all staff and professional learning community at large. Participation in Professional Development for teachers provided by Borough Field Support Center to support professional growth and effective teaching. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Instructional materials to support curriculum development during the school day, teachers participate in weekly PLOs. Intervisitations between highly effective and effective teachers are scheduled to increase school capacity Lead teachers participate in monthly ambassador meetings provided by our district office Consumable instructional materials for use during extended day programs and during the school day. Teacher per session for Curriculum Planning, creation of pacing calendars and Teacher Team collaboration. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 36  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Conducting observations and providing guidance for parents on the referral process- (School Psychologist) - Workshops for families on topics such as transitioning into Pre-K, transitioning into kindergarten, helping your child enjoy reading (Pre-K/Kindergarten teachers and administration) - Kindergarten open house in June for Pre-K families (Pre-K/Kindergarten teachers and administration) Curriculum aligned to the Foundation for the Common Core for Pre-Kindergarten (Classroom teachers 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. - Teachers will meet during common planning periods to discuss Next Generation Learning Standards and implementation of lessons - Teachers will discuss what differentiation strategies are successful to support students in meeting and exceeding the ELA and Math standards Various teacher teams are involved in the gathering of information and analyzing data for improvement purposes-Teacher Teams, School Leadership Team, Vertical Teacher Teams and Administration 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2018-19 CEP 37  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 360,847.00 Title II, Part A Federal 143,752.00 Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,592,424.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A Part 3; 5B part 3; 5C Part 3; 5D Part 3; 5E Part 3 5A Part 3; 5B Part 3; 5C Part 3; 5D Part 3; 5E Part 3 5A Part 3; 5B part 3; 5C Part 3; 5D Part 3; 5E Part 3 N/A 5A Part 3; 5B part 3; 5C Part 3; 5D Part 3; 5E Part 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 38   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 194 Raoul Wallenberg, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Meeting; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● encouraging more parents to volunteer/attend all school related activities; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school and grade newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In examining our student’s results in the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) of the NYSESLAT we noticed that our ELLs perform well in the modalities of listening and speaking and poorly in reading and writing. This information correlates with our analysis of the New York State English Language Arts assessment. We noticed that the majority of our ELLs were performing below the state standards in reading. Their lack of ability to read and write in English is making it very difficult for them to score levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA. We address their needs by strengthening their reading skills with particular emphasis on decoding skills, phonemic awareness, comprehension, fluency, vocabulary development, and modeled and guided writing activities In review of our data for ELLs performance in two content areas, we noticed that ELLs in grades 3-5 on an transitional and expanding level were performing on a level 1 and level 2 as per State Math assessments.The implication for our instructional program in reference to this information is to continue to assist and develop vocabulary skills to help in mathematical problem solving. The implication for instruction for our ELL program is to assist our students in developing their decoding skills, phonemic awareness and comprehension skills. We must strengthen their fluency by deepening their vocabulary and building large stable sight word recognition.Therefore, the Title III funds allocated to P.S. 194 will be used to provide supplementary services to further develop our students reading and math skills. In addition, our Title III After school Program aligns itself with our District Wide Instructional focus of Math and strengthening student achievement with all Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. We are planning for our ELLs to participate in the following program. Project Excellence: a program whose goal is literacy and that provides additional intervention and support services for ELLs. Letters in parents preferred language will be back packed home to notifying parents of our program. In addition, we will inform parents during our one on one parent meetings. A record of letters sent and conversations had with parents regarding the Title III program will be kept by our ENL teacher. Our ELLs in grade 2,3 ,4 and 5 (total of 45 students) participating in the Title III program will be grouped into two groups of students. The program will run every Thursday afternoon from 2:40 pm- 4:40 pm. for a total of 13 sessions. A group of 2 and 3 graders (total of 21 students) and a group of 4 and 5 graders (total of 24 students). Daily attendance will be taken and kept by the providing teacher. Licensed/certified ELL teachers along with licensed common branch teachers will co- teach students. The teachers will be grouping the students according to their specific needs, e.g. grade and proficiency levels reading and math. The group instruction will be in English and aimed to help ELLs in their reading and math abilities. They will be using research based programs such as BrainPop ELL and Team. All materials used for this program will be supplemental and are not used for daily instruction. In analyzing the NYSESALT results we noticed that our ELLs struggled with the short and extended writing components. This additional program will help students become better writers. In order to prepare them for the NYSESLAT as well as the NYS ELA the teachers will be incorporating testing sophistication strategies through the use of Attanasio & Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT materials. Home language support will be provided through the use of translated books and technology. The ENL teachers will co teach with the content 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teachers incorporating ENL strategies for reading in each group for an hour each. Then students will also rotate into the computer lab and work on the BrainPop ELL program for an hour. This will be a 13-week program beginning early January and ending in mid April. Our goal is to help our ELLs achieve the same level of proficiency in reading as our mainstream students. By offering this additional service we are giving ourselves an opportunity to achieve our goal. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We at PS 194 realize there is always a need for additional development of best practices by teachers of ELLs. All instruction personnel participating in the Title III program at PS 194 will be provided professional development to build upon their knowledge and skills. Including standard based instruction and improvement of language proficiency instruction of ELLs. This professional development will be only for teachers with students involved in the Title III program and will not be combined with their regular PD hours (this professional development will be above and beyond teachers regular school assigned PD hours). Staff will attend workshops and professional conferences to sharpen and update skills throughout school year. They will attend a series of 2 PD sessions. The professional developments will be given by a licensed/certified teacher for example: our math AIS teacher and ELL Teacher will provide PD for the teachers of ELLs in the Project Excellence program they will also be receiving per session pay for the PD provided. They will also receive PD trainings through district level PDs and webinars. They will conduct 2 PD sessions maintaining an attendance folder with PD agendas and sign in sheets. These PDs will concentrate on scaffolding ELL students learning during math content. A total of 2 teachers will participate in these sessions and they will run 1 Monday a month from 4:00 pm- 5:00 pm beginning mid January and mid February. Topics to be discussed will be the integration of math contents with ESL instructional strategies. PD session titles will be: How do we modify math strategies for our ELLs? and How do we incorporate ESL strategies within our math content? These professional developments will be given in English and will concentrate on teaching the English language. The teacher giving the professional development (ENL Teacher) will be paid per session and the teachers receiving the training (2 teachers of Title III students) will be paid at training rate. The professional development will be held after school for a minimum of 2 hours in addition to all the other staff developments mandated by the state. We at PS 194 strongly believe in our staff and their dedication to our students. With this in mind we believe that in order for our teachers to keep up with the on going curriculum changes and standards they need to be properly trained especially when teaching ELLs. We are trying to achieve this by providing our teachers with staff development meetings that will give them the opportunity to learn new strategies and new teaching methods. Through the help of the professional development the teachers are adding to their experiences and become better resources for their students. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The program makes every effort to involve parents of ELLs in every aspect of their student’s learning. For this reason we will conduct a series of parent workshops concentrating on many different topics such as • Parent Orientation Workshop/Welcome back breakfast September 2018 • ELL/Math Workshop December 2018 - Getting for Middle School January 2019 - Getting for NYSESLAT April 2019 These family math engagement nights will provide families with the resources to help their child succeed. Many parents have voiced their concerns about not being able to support their child with Math due to their lack of knowledge of the Math shifts and skills. Our goal will be to expose all our ELL parents to the different skills that their children will be required to obtain in order to perform on NYS assessments. These workshops will be available for parents of students involved in the Title III and all ENL parents. They will run from 4 pm- 5 :30 pm. and attendance for these workshops will be maintained along with agendas and handouts by our ENL teacher. There will be a total of 2 teachers presenting for each workshop. A flyer notifying the parents in their native language of the upcoming parent workshops will be translated through the translation and interpretation unit. These flyers will be sent home to encourage parent attendance. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Raoul Wallenberg Borough Brooklyn School Number 194 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joy Mendelsohn Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ruth GarciaBerta Satchell Teacher/Subject Area Debra Sullivan- Math Teacher/Subject Area Heather Iacoviello- Dance Related-Service Provider Monica Kalfur Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Lillian Benezra Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Renata Ashraf Parent Coordinator Keisha Stevens Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 521 Total number of ELLs 68 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.05% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs with the Fountas and Pinnell Reading assessment. Our school understands the need for our early grades to develop a strong foundation in reading in order for our upper grade students to succeed. That is why we emphasize the importance of our early readers to be able to decode and develop good phonics skills. We collect the data obtained through our Fountas & Pinnell assessments to drive instruction and grouping. As a result of reviewing our 2016-2017 data we noticed that our ELLs in grades K-2 are below their expected levels in reading,only 30% of ELLs in grades K-2 are approaching or on grade level in reading based on Fountas and Pinnell assessments. So we decided to incorporate word study into our early grades literacy units and use the Fundations phonics program as a supplement. Our ELLs are below the expected levels in listening comprehension and writing modality. The use of listening centers and books on tapes are helping us strengthen our students listening abilities. The incorporation of the CCLS writing standards and development of rubrics will 2018-19 CEP 53  help our teachers address our students needs in writing. This school year we will continue to implement the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments for all our grades. This will help us create a clear portrait of the our school's strength and areas of need. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our teachers use the assessments three times a year to monitor students growth or challenges. Teachers use the baseline assessments to help drive instruction and develop action plans to address student needs. They plan as a collaborative team to develop lessons that align themselves to CCLS and incorporate language acquisition skills to help language development. In addition, we have hired a second ENL teacher to help support student achievement. Our teachers push in to classrooms and plan with the general education teacher to develop lessons that incorporate scaffolds and language support for all students including ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? A measure of our program’s success is that our ELLs are moving along as measured by the NYSESLAT. Proficiency level data indicate that students at Entering and Emerging levels are in early childhood grades and are new to our ESL program. They move to the Transitioning and Expanding levels as they move up through the grades. All ELL students have also shown improvement on their Fountas/Pinnell levels but not as much as their language proficient peers. We use the data provided by the EDAT to identify areas of need for our ELLs, this school year 2016-2017 our data showed that the majority of our students struggled in the writing modality. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers work collaboratively in teacher teams meeting monthly along with the ELL teacher to identify areas of needs or success for the students using an inquiry approach. They look at student work using a protocol to identify areas of success and needs. They monitor student progress to develop interventions to address students needs. These meetings help develop lesson plans and actions plans that are tailored to specific student needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school provides universal screeening for all our students. Our ELLs are screened using HLIS and if deemed an ELL they are administered the NYSITELL upon enrollment. With this information, teachers will begin to uncover the factors that could influence the students' English language learning process. This knowledge then guides linguistically responsive instructional choices. The student is then provided with a strong core (tier 1) instruction, ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills or competencies measured are provided with intensive, targeted intervention (Tier II and Tier III). The use of baseline Fountas and Pinnell assessments helps give teachers a starting point for all learners, the continous use of Rigby ELL assessment kit helps benchmark ELLs in all four modalities throughout the year along with periodic Fountas and Pinnell assessments. Using the Digging into Data protocols during our Teacher Teams help ELL, AIS and classroom teachers analyze student data and help guide next steps. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our ELLs are grouped heterogeneously according to grade level. This gives an opportunity for low-level English proficiency students to interact with higher-level English proficiency students. The ENL teacher guides classroom instruction and addresses ELLs specific needs by analyzing NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA, and Math scores. The ENL teacher uses data driven instruction to plan for her students and set individual student goals using the ELL Data Anaylsis Tool Report to identify student areas of challenges. In examining our student’s results in the 2016-2017 NYSESLAT four modalities (listening, speaking, reading and writing) we noticed that our ELLs perform well in the modalities of speaking and listening and poorly in reading and writing. We noticed that the majority of our ELLs were performing below the state standards in reading. Their lack of ability to read and write in English is making it very difficult for them to score levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA. We address their needs by strengthening 2018-19 CEP 54  their reading skills with particular emphasis on decoding skills, phonemic awareness, comprehension, fluency, vocabulary development, and modeled and guided writing activities. We are also addressing their needs by providing support in reading and writing through our Title III After-School program. All teachers providing services to ELLs work closely with the ENL teacher to ensure that they incorporate ELL strategies into their small group instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings are disseminated through our teacher team meetings and our professional learning opportunities. Teachers meet with ENL teachers and data specialist to discuss data analysis and collaboratively work together develop next steps and implications for instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At P.S. 194 we implement Free Standing ENL Pull-Out program.The program will fulfill mandated units of ENL (as per CR Part 154 requirements) for each student depending on English language proficiency level. Our ELLs are grouped heterogeneously by grades and proficiency levels. Our ENL teacher provides services to our ENL students via push in and pull out. She pulls out the entering and emerging students for a total of 180 minutes to provide the mandated minutes for stand alone and pushes in to service students for 180 minutes to provide the integrated ELA services. We incorporate explicit ENL instruction, and our ENL teacher aligns her instruction with the ENL and Common Core State Standards She groups her students heterogeneously giving opportunities for students in levels entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding to interact with each other. The use of leveled readers allows for the teacher to provide differentiated instruction to address all language levels. Informal teacher observations are used to determine how effectively students participate in and complete each skill lesson at their level of proficiency. The use of scaffolding strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognitive development are implemented throughout our program to help academic development and support our ELLs in the content areas. The comprehension of academic content is supported through the use of visuals and manipulatives. Language functions and structures are imbedded in lessons along with language objectives. Students participate in accountable talk during class instruction through the use of activities such as literature circles and partner/buddy share. The teacher models the use of language and charts language structures that should be used during conversations. These languages structures remain posted throughout the room for ELLs to refer to. Pre-taught vocabulary is used to deepen comprehension of lessons. Pictures and manipulatives are used to help ELLs develop meaning vocabulary words. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 55  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As part of the CR Part 154 requirements for English as a New Language our program delivers a total of 360 minutes for students in the Entering phase consisting of 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Students in the Emerging phase are provided with a total of 360 minutes of services consisting of 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of ENL/ELA. Students in the transitioning phase are provided a total of 180 minutes consisting of 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA. Our students in the expanding phase are provided with a total of 180 minutes consisting with 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Students who reach the commanding phase are provided with 90 minutes of integrated ELA service. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We align our ENL program with the Common Core State Standards and with classroom core curriculum. Students have access to a leveled and genre organized classroom libraries in English. ENL Instruction will focus on reading/writing skills and meaningful content so that students understand why they need to learn details of language use. Integration of reading and math content, with emphasis on problem solving will incorporate ENL strategic instruction that is aligned with grade level math curriculum and Common Core Standards. ELL students are supported through small group math instruction and math AIS push-in grades 3,4,and 5. The integration of technology to support math concepts help our entering and emerging level students attain a deeper understanding. The use of math glossaries assist the students in expanding their knowledge of vocabulary needed to solve math problems. The ENL teacher collaborates closely with math, science and social studies content teachers to ensure that content lessons support and scaffold ELL learning. In addition, the ENL teacher plans thematic units based on content area subject that include science and social studies themes. ENL teacher refers to the CCLS when planning and identifies in her lesson plans the CCLS that apply. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are assessed in content areas (math, science, social studies and technology) in English only they are not assessed in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our plan for Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) includes intensive academic intervention based on assessment (formal and informal) of a student’s academic and social need. Both small group and whole classroom settings will be provided that address needs via lessons and activities that are age and grade appropriate. Students will be provided with differentiation of instruction that encompass both academic and social needs. The integration of our Sanford and Harmony social emotional program will help address social emotional needs. Integration of content and language objectives within the SIOP model will address the students academic and language needs. Improvements that we are currently working on this school year is getting our ELLs college and career ready. Our ENL teacher along with our monolingual classroom teachers are aligning their curriculum with the Common Core State Standards. The integration of technology within their lessons helps our students equip themselves with the resources needed to succeed in the future. We offer the following plan for our ELL students receiving service 4 to 6 years. As a school, when we analyse student data (NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/Math/Science, Baseline Assessments, Benchmark Assessments, Fountas & Pinnell levels) we study and interpret student work to identify areas of strengths and needs. Then we develop an action plan that helps the ELL and classroom teacher provide tailored small group instruction on students needs. Academic Intervention services in content areas using ESL strategies are also provided to assist these students. 2018-19 CEP 56  Newcomers to P.S. 194 are grouped by grade level and language proficiency. Services addressing verbal communication, vocabulary, literacy and acculturation are provided during regular school day and during extended day programs. A Welcome Breakfast is held early September to welcome our newly admitted students and parents to our school community. At this breakfast they are introduced to the administrative staff as well as our entire school staff. Test sophistication and instruction in content areas is provided for long-term ELLs in small group settings and during small group instruction. Students are also provided with AIS services in content areas that are grade appropriate. Our plan for Special Education ELLs provides guidance services and pull-out services as they are indicated in a student’s IEP. In addition, ELL Special Education students have a Special Education teacher who provides ongoing support and articulates regularly with the ESL teacher and guidance counselor. For our former ELLs we continue to provide testing accomodation for up to two years, such accomodations include separate location and time and half. They also many former ELLs receive AIS services in reading and math to support student growth. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs students are provided with a coherent and rigorous curriculum aligned to CCSS. The integration of Treasure Chest for English language learners as a reading program for our students help scaffold and accelerate their learning. In addition, the implementation of Fundation and Wilson phonics program help develop strong phonemic and phonetic awareness in our students. These programs develop and strengthen students decoding skills and fluency abilities helping promote their reading confidence. With the new CCLS all students are required to interact with text that are very complex. The ability to read fluently and decode accurately help the ELLs deepen their reading comprehension and focus on the meaning of the text rather than struggle with the decoding of the text. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To ensure that we meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment our ELL-SWDs are grouped along with GE English language learners. They both participate in heterogeneous group work with students with varied proficiency levels and abilities. In addition, some SWDs are mainstreamed during content area study to maximize time spent with non disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Through the use of manipulative and ENL strategies we will deepen the students understanding of key math terms and number facts. Lesson plans include all four components of literacy listening, speaking, reading and writing. All ELLs are expected to participate in small group activities to help in the development of oral and written language. Our ENL teacher follows the writer’s workshop model to guide students in writing activities. ELLs produce persuasive, informative and narrative writing pieces following an author’s writing process: prewriting, drafting, revising and publishing and aligned Common Core State Standards. Computers are available in our ENL classroom and regular classrooms for our students to use. Teachers are encouraged to integrate the use of such computers in their lessons. In analyzing the New York State English Language Art assessment and the New York State Math assessments we noticed that our Grade 4/5 students needed additional support in their reading and writing skills and they needed to receive continued support in math. The majority of our ELL students are level 1 and 2 in ELA and Math. As a school, we decided to 2018-19 CEP 57  continued support by providing AIS reading and math support for all our grades 4/5 ELL students. The ENL teacher, AIS Math and AIS ELA teachers engage in many collegial conferences discussing students progress with the additional AIS support. Our plan on continuing transitional support for ELLs that achieve proficiency in English are during the day push in small group services in reading and math for a total of 90 minutes. Former ELLs also receive testing accommodations for two years after their exit of the program. These testing accommodations include: • Time extensions • Separate locations and/or small group administration • Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries (word for word translations only) • Simultaneous use of English and other available language editions • Oral translations for lower incidence languages • Written responses in the native language • Third reading of listening selections After looking closely at our ELLs performance on the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA results we concluded that our ELLs needed support in listening and speaking. So we as a school developed an action plan to expose our ELLs to rich literature and higher order thinking skills. This school year we decided to improve our ELL program by providing in house PD for all our teachers on Higher Order questioning to help promote our students criticial thinking. ELL students are identified based on weakness in content areas (science and social studies), the classroom teacher provide interventions using ENL strategies and methodologies shared by the ENL teacher. Our science and social studies teacher have access to and utilize the ENL materials housed in the ENL classroom to support content area. In addition, units of studies that are covered by classroom teachers are followed up by the ENL teacher. This practice has shown effectiveness in our students grade 4 science assessments results, majority of our ELLs performing on a high level 2 and above. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? An improvement that we are currently working on this school year is getting our ELLs college and career ready. Our ENL teacher along with our monolingual classroom teachers are aligning their curriculum with the Common Core State Standards. The integration of technology within their lessons helps our students equip themselves with the resources needed to succeed in the future. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs participate in all the curricular and extracurricular activities offered at our school such Music and Art. After school programs are also provided for our English Language Learners such programs include Title III programs for developing their reading, writing and math skills. The school uses the Translation and Interpretation unit to assist us in translating parent letters and flyers inviting their children to participate in school activities. Many of our grades participate in music and art periods. In the music program our ELL students are exposed to music instruments and composer of the month studies. During their art periods they are engaged in art lessons that incorporate paintings and artist of the month. Their paintings are displayed around the school buildng to promote their self-esteem. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 194 uses a broad variety of instructional materials, methodologies, and resource personnel to support our ELL population. Among these instructional materials are novels, Rigby In Step Readers, Treasure Chest for English Language Learners, Writing Fundamentals Units of Study, and Leap Pads which help address our students reading and writing needs. Balanced literacy is the fulcrum of our program for general and special education students as well as for our ELL population. Phonics, author studies and supplementary basal materials support the program. 2018-19 CEP 58  The use of multi-cultural books for shared/guided/independent reading and read aloud are used to connect to student’s prior knowledge and to promote cultural acceptance and build on ELL’s self esteem. We will use our available materials including technology resources, such as the Lexia reading program to help further develop their decoding abilities. The use of student laptops and Smartboard, which are located in the ENL classroom, help expose ELL students to different educational websites. The use of illustrated trade books, technology and websites such as BrainPop, CongressforKids, and TimeforKids help support and scaffold social studies instruction. Hands on experiments and use of manipulatives in science help support our kinestic learners and beginning level ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Though we only offer an ENL program at PS 194 and English is the only language used for instruction we still support the student’s native language. We have native language books in our school’s library in the languages of Urdu, Russian, Spanish and Chinese and in our ELL classroom. Students are encouraged to read the books and take them home to share with their family. Native language testing is available for students in the content areas of math, and science. Students are often buddy up with students in the classroom who speak the same language to help them throughout the day. The use of the translation and interpretation unit help assist in translating school forms and communicating with parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required service and supports correspond to ELLs age levels at P.S. 194 as evidenced by grouping of students in contiguous grades and the use of leveled reading texts for instructional purposes which are aligned to their performance levels. P.S. 194 uses a broad variety of instructional materials, methodologies, and resource personnel to support our ELL population. Among these instructional materials are novels, Rigby In Step Readers, Treasure Chest for English Language Learners, Writing Fundamentals Units of Study, and Leap Pads which help address our students reading and writing needs. Balanced literacy is the fulcrum of our program for general and special education students as well as for our ELL population. Phonics, author studies and supplementary basal materials support the program. The use of multi-cultural books for shared/guided/independent reading and read aloud are used to connect to student’s prior knowledge and to promote cultural acceptance and build on ELL’s self esteem. We will use our available materials including technology resources, such as the Lexia reading program to help further develop their decoding abilities. The use of student laptops and Smartboard, which are located in the ENL classroom, help expose ELL students to different educational websites. The use of illustrated trade books, technology and websites such as BrainPop, CongressforKids, and TimeforKids help support and scaffold social studies instruction. Hands on experiments and use of manipulatives in science help support our kinestic learners and beginning level ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In early September we have a Welcome Breakfast, all parents and students are invited to meet and greet the school staff and administrators. This welcome breakfast helps assist newly enrolled ELLs and their parents accommodate to our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 59  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teacher attends off site workshops, seminars and conferences related to ELLs.. She attends monthly ENL professional development meetings within our district to enhance her teaching techniques and to be up to date with ongoing ENL policies and changes. Our teachers participate in inter-visitations, mentoring and participation in professional conferences. These professional development activities will deepen the teacher’s understanding of scaffolding skills. Teachers also participate in conferences and workshop aimed at increasing parent involvement in our school community, especially with the immigrant community. The mainstream classroom teacher participates in workshops with the ENL teacher to assist in extending teaching skills to support ELLs in the classroom. Our clerical staff will also participate in mini workshops throughout the school day with our ENL teacher to provide information on how to interact with our ELL Parents and procedures in obtaining translation and interpretation services. Our ELL teacher meets with our guidance counselor on a one to one session to review ENL student NYSESLAT data and parent selection surveys to ensure that the students receive the services they are entitled to when transitioning to JHS. Our entire teaching staff participates in Teacher Team Meetings as well as monthly Grade Conferences. Our ENL teacher participates in a Core Teacher Team where she gathers with principal, assistant principal, AIS math and reading teachers, and a grade leader from grades 2-5 once a month. During scheduled Grade Conferences monolingual classroom and cluster teachers will participate in teacher team meetings that help them incorporate ENL strategies and methodologies with content area. Such strategies will include the use of cooperative learning activities and the use of scaffolding techniques integrated into their balanced literacy. Teachers will be encouraged to keep observation logs of their ELLs to assist in identifying their learning habits and abilities. In October the ENL teacher will provide a professional development session for all staff memebers on "Teaching ELLs in Content Areas." In late September all new teachers will participate in a professional development session concentrating on differentiating instruction during their ELA periods using ELL strategies. These professional development sessions will assist teachers in creating multiple entry points and differentiation within their lesson plans that help scaffold ELLs engage in CCLS. Teachers of ELLs participate in weekly professional developments that incorporate the use of different strategies that help support all learners in their classroom including ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to support our staff in assisting our ELLs transition from elementary to middle school our ELL teacher meets with all the Fifth grade teacher, our School Guidance Counselor and Pupil Personnel secretary to make sure that all ELLs are transitioned to the appropriate school program. They assure themselves that all documents needed for the student is organized and completed to follow the student to his/her new school. All teachers will participate in professional development that will focus on language acquisition and best practices for co teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners for a total of 15% of their hours. These sessions will be provided by our ENL teacher/ ENL instructional support liasion/ online webinars etc. Agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained by the teacher in their professional development folders. In addition our ENL teacher will participate in monthly professional developments provided by Borough Support Centers. She will also participate in webinars 2018-19 CEP 60  andprofessional readings that align to ELL specific topics. She will maintain all agendas and attendance will be maintained by her and our payroll secretary when applicable. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teacher will be providing individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss their language development progress and NYSESLAT assessment results during 15 minutes one on one meetings schuduled during our Family engagement days. On site or over the phone interpretors will be provided to facilitate the meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The program makes every effort to involve parents of ELLs in every aspect of student’s learning. When an ELL enters the program, his/her parent(s) are given an orientation in which they are shown a New York City Department of Education video (in the home language when possible) and have the program, state standards, assessments, school expectations, general program requirements, and other program choices explained to them. Scheduled parent/teacher conferences take place at least twice a year. Throughout the year, efforts are made to ensure that all possible program and school information are distributed to the parents of ELLs in their home language. The translation funds are used to translate parent letters and forms. The parent coordinator works collaboratively with the ENL and classroom teachers to increase parent participation in school activitiess. A translation and interpretation policy has been implemented to facilitate communication between school administrators, teachers and parents of ELLs. Translated versions of school letters will be available to parents of ELLs and interpreters will also be available to assist parents in communicating with teachers and school staff. Parents of ELLs are invited to participate in all of our parent outreach programs such as: ELL/ELA/Math day workshop in October this workshop help parents familiarize themselves with our schools instructional focus and our new curriculum (Units of Study and Eureka Math), Family Science Night in November, this workshop help our parents become aware of different scientific terminology and experiments that their child will be exposed to during the school year . They are also invited to our September Welcome Back breakfast which was held on September 22, 2015 this workshop allowed our parents to meet their child's teacher and visit the classroom observing a lesson. A Title III parent workshop in April will be held to inform them on upcoming assessments and how to further assist their children to prepare for the exams. Interpretators will be present to assist in interpretating with our parents during these workshops. During some of these parent workshops interpretators will be present to assist the parents in Spanish, Chinese, and Urdu (these are the major languages present in our school community). The use of contracted vendors will provide the interpretation services and if any additional language is needed during the event we will contact the interpretation hotline or request for a parent volunteer to assist. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joy Mendelsohn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Raoul Wallenberg School DBN: 22K194 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joy Mendelsohn Title Principal Lillian Benezra Assistant Principal Keisha Stevens Parent Coordinator Ruth Garcia ENL/Bilingual Teacher Renata Ashraf Parent Debra Sullivan Teacher/Subject Area Heather Iacoviello Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Berta Satchell Other ENL Teacher Monica Kalfur Other Related Service Provider Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 10/16/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/16/17 10/16/17 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K194 School Name: Raoul Wallenberg Superintendent: Ms. Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ruth Garcia ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Throughout the years at P.S. 194 we have seen our immigrant student population increase. With this growth we have noticed the importance of providing our immigrant families with written translations of all our school letters and forms. We find this to be important because parents need to be informed of all ongoing activities, assessments and events within our school and concerning their child. Upon registration of new admits our principal, ELL teacher and parent coordinator meet and greet our parents. This opportunity is taken to interview the parent and child to see if a language other than English is spoken at home and preferred by the parent. Then we have our parents complete a Home Language Identification Survey. Parents are requested to check off what language/s are spoken at home to help us identify the different languages in our school community.Parents are also asked to see what their preference of language is when receiving school notices. This information is checked off on the Home Language Survey and our pupil accounting secretary enters the informaiton into ATS. 2018-19 CEP 65  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Urdu Arabic Spanish Chinese Bengali Haitian Creole Georgian Hindi Mandarin Russian Spanish Tadzhik Ukrainian Uzbek 40 27 33 25 1 4 1 1 2 7 33 1 9 4 7% 5% 6% 4% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 6% 1% 2% 1% 40 27 33 25 1 4 1 1 2 7 33 1 9 4 7% 5% 6% 4% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 6% 1% 2% 1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome back letters, school hours, dismissal forms, Parent Conference Letters, . b These letters are mostly distributed in early September and some when the dates of the events are near. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. These letters will be emailed to the Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation, if the unit is unable to translate the letters we will use a contracted vendor. 2018-19 CEP 66  Emergency Blue Cards, These letters are mostly distributed in early September and some when the dates of the events are near. ENL Parent Meetings, Title III afterschool letters distributed during the school year to the parents Parent Bill of Rights September and throughout the school year These are provided by the DOE in translated versions These letters will be emailed to the Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation, if the unit is unable to translate the letters we will use a contracted vendor. These letters will be emailed to the Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation, if the unit is unable to translate the letters we will use a contracted vendo 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Four parent teacher conferences (September, November, March and May), curriculum night ( September ), , and Bimonthly We also have IEP meetings for annual reviews. Monthly Parent workshops scheduled for Tuesdays during our Family Engagement afternoons evening workshops . Math Workshops December ELL Parent Meetings September/October provide interpretation service(s)? Interpretation services will be provided by either a school staff member or a contracted vendor. Interpretation services will be provided by either a school staff member or a contracted vendor. Interpretation services will be provided by either a school staff member or a contracted vendor Interpretation services will be provided by either a school staff member or a contracted vendor 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school maintains a blue emergency card binder for all our students in the main office. In case of an emergency, a designated school staff will take the binder with them and contact parents. To be able to communicate with parents of students who are limited English proficienct the school staff will use the over the phone interpretation unit to contact the parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure2018-19 CEP 67  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 will be made avaliable to all our staff members during our first faculty meetings in early September. We will allocate our translation and interpretation funds to help us meet compliance. A faculty conference in September with the entire staff was held to inform them of the translation needs of our school and the procedure for requesting translated documents and interpretation services using the hotline. In addition, a spreadsheet with all the languages present in our school has been created and maintained by school staff to assist in providing the translated letters for each student in our school according to the parents request. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At P.S. 194 we make sure to be in compliance with the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Our school provides our parents whose language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered languages, and instructions on how to obtain such services.We have posted in our primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the office where a copy of the Bill of Rights is available. In addition, we have signage in our main entrance notifying parents to see a staff member for interpretation services in Chinese, Spanish and Russian. An additional sign is posted informing parents of the avaliable interpretation services in any other language through the Translation and Interpretation Unit and hotline. Through the ELL Parent Orientation Workshop and our Welcome Back breakfast, which are held in September, we plan to notify our parents of the translation and interpretation services that are available. Letters in their native languages will be sent home at the beginning of the school year informing them of the availability of these additional services. Our Parent Coordinator will also assist in notifying parents and all family members. We will display flyers and posters by the main entrance promoting the service. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During our parent workshops parents will be encouraged to provide verbal and written feedback regarding the quality and availability of services via a parent survey. 2018-19 CEP 68 
