2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 22K198 School Name: P.S. 198 BROOKLYN Principal: JOY-ANN MORGAN 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 22K198 PS 198 332200010198 PK - 5 4105 Farragut Road Brooklyn NY 11210 718/282-4920 Phone Number: 718/940-0821 Fax: Joy-Ann Morgan Jmorgan2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 22 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Joy-Ann Morgan Carmela McCann Elissa Thomas Wendy Dechowitz n/a Christine Booty/CAMBA District Information Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue Jbove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718/968-6115 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Cheryl Watson- Harris FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 cwatson21@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-5131 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Christine Booty/CAMBA CBO Representative, if applicable Alyssa Colarossi Wendy Dechowitz Dawn Campbell Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5 Name Joy-Ann Morgan Carmela McCann Elissa Thomas-Bey Melissa Rougier Bethany Austin Billini *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name Claudette Pottinger Hassan Brissett Chanal Felisme Keisha Dormil Nanika Plenty Devaughn Lyken Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to establish a community of lifelong learners through a collaborative effort of teachers, students, administrators and parents. Instruction and student achievement will be driven by the highest standards and expectations as reflected in the performance of all students. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 198 is a diverse school community made up of students whose families migrated to the United States mostly from the Caribbean. Families in this community embrace education as the key to the opportunity for their children to have a good life. They respect teachers and the position they hold in their children’s lives. In 2017 PS 198 became a magnet school. We are now the Magnet School for Applied Learning in the Arts and Engineering. Currently our teachers are working to provide students with an engaging and rigorous learning experience through the creation of units of studies using Project based Learning. Last year we ended the year with our magnet celebration through the lens of an Egyptian Museum. As of this school year, 2018 - 2019, PS 198 has become a Community School. Our partner in this work is CAMBA. As a result of this designation as a community school our students through the support of funding provided to CAMBA will have increased learning opportunities in an after school setting which will result in improved student learning and a decrease in students' learning gaps. This year CAMBA will provide afterschool programs for 115 students. The after school program includes an arts based youth development program, sports, fitness as well as STEM. Students families and the community at large will also benefit from this partnership through the many educational ad empowerment opportunities provided by CAMBA. A full time Community Director is also added to the staff of PS 198. This person will work with the CAMBA staff, PS 198 staff and fmilies to provide the richest learning opporunties for all students. In addition to CAMBA, East Flatbush Village is also providing afterschool programs for PS 198 students. This year over 60 students will take part in the EFV aftershool program which includes homework assistance and enrichment learning in STEM. East Flatbush Village also provides workshops for parents. We've partnered with Marquis Studios to provide performing and creative arts instruction through 3-cycles of study for the year. In each cycle a teaching artist work with students and their teachers to learn in units based on our magnet theme and social studies content. We also were awarded a New York State Extended Day Violence Prevention grant. Through these funds our Grade 4 students take part in a Leadership training program during the school day. The goal of this program is to teach students to develop good character and make healthy choices. This year the program will include Grade 5 students. In addition, ESDV also provide for a three day 105-minute per day after school program. In the after school program students take part in drama instruction and sport. Funding for this program will be for the five years. To provide after-school programs for our students, we expanded our partnership with East Flatbush Village. In this after-school program students are able to do homework, engage in enrichment as well intervention activities. The goal of all these partnerships to to infuse the theme of learning through the arts and engineering into our school's instructional program and so that going forward all learning will take place through project based learning. Our Professional Learning Community continues to work together to decrease learning gaps and increase students' independent achievement. We are working with coaches to revise units of study, incorporate learning tasks for all learners at their respective levels and to ensure that lessons reflect recent developments in content related pedagogy. To help us do this work, this year we've joined Columbia Teachers' College as a Reading and Writing Project School. Two Staff Developers will work with our teachers in grade level teams to revise our units of studies in Reading and Writing. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 10  None 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Celebration 0 Designation as a Community School with partnership with CAMBA 0 Magnet School of Applied Learning in the Arts and Engineering Porject Based Learning Arts Education 0 Rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards o Aligned use of resources to support instructional goals that meet students’ needs o Support and evaluation of teachers through feedback using the Danielson framework and analysis of learning outcomes o A culture of learning that communicates high expectations with supports o Reading Intervention for Grades 2 & 3 students o Character Building Intervention program for Boys o PBIS to support character development in all students o Families as Learning Partners gave parents the opportunity to spend time in their children’s classroom every third Friday of the month o East Flatbush Village Afterschool Program o ESDV Leadership Afterschool Program o Girls on the Run o Broadway on Brooklyn’s East 42 nd Street end of the Year Performing Arts Assembly Areas of Focus o Continue to develop our Professional Learning Community with increased opportunities for teachers to work in collaborative Teams o Continue to use formative assessments to increase student achievement o Increased Intervention opportunities for students who are struggling 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K198 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 390 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 52 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 18 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 76.7% % Reduced Lunch 3.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.0% 9.2% 1.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.4 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 45 45 2 92.0% 4.6% 20.5% 85.4% 3.3% 1.0% 2 8% 5 28.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths o Across the curriculum, rigorous tasks intentionally embed the instructional shifts and are aligned to content standards to increase academic performance for all learners o Quality Review finding: School leaders support the development of teacher practice through their frequent cycles of classroom observation and ongoing analysis of student work that has led to continuous improvement in teacher performance o Quality Review and School Survey finding: School leaders and faculty consistently convey high expectations and successfully partner with families to connect college and career readiness to support student progress Areas of Need o QR and PPO recommendations: Refine instruction across the school to ensure teachers’ use of scaffolds and extensions to meet students at their respective entry points in order to increase student performance and reduce learning gaps o QR and school level self assessment finding: Further deepen the school’s assessment practices, and analyze student learning outcomes to make adjustments at the team and classroom levels to ensure that all students demonstrate increased mastery Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase teachers proficiency in ELA and Mathematics instruction. This will result in a 5% growth on the 2019 New York State ELA test and 5% on the 2019 Math Exam. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional learning in creating units, projects and lesson plans.  Teacher College PD for Reading and writing  Metamorphosis Mathematics PD   PBL PD STEM PD All teachers September to June in 6-8 week cycles Review and revise units of study to include the use of scaffolds and extension activities to address all learners by including appropriately differentiated activities in all classes and provide increased Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention to allow access and engagement to the curriculum and project based learning activities. All teachers September to June in 6-8 week cycles Create revisions to the Mathematics and ELA curriculum based on analysis of students' data to include school wide integration of our magnet theme of applied learning in the arts and engineering. All teachers Sept to June  Principal  Magnet Staff Developer  Assistant Principal  Grade Leaders  Magnet Theme Coordinator  TC Staff Developer  Principal  Magnet Staff Developer  Assistant Principal  Grade Leaders  Art Consultant  Magnet Theme Coordinator  Data Specialist  Principal  Assistant Principal  Magnet Staff Developer  Magnet Theme Coordinator  TC Staff Developer  Math Lead Teachers 2018-19 CEP 15 Engaging families through professional learning opportunities, student performances and hands on workshops facilitated by students. All Parents Sept to June  Principal  Assistant Principal  Magnet Theme Coordinator  Parent Coordinator  Teacher Representative from each grade  CAMBA  East Flatbush Village 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families as Learning Partners (FALP) once per month families get to spend the first hour of the day in their children's classroom learning about a specific subject area. Family Math nights. Parent Coordinator and Magnet Theme Coordinator Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Magnet Theme Coordinator Per Diem substitute Teachers to cover teachers for professional learning time during the school day Per session TC Staff Developers Metamorphosis Math PD Buck Instritute PBL PD NYC STEM Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 16  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. STAR Assessment and progress monitoring of students' reading and Math progress Inquiry Team study to evaluate students’ progress. Formative assessments ongoing during daily lessons Fountas & Pinnell September, January and May and at other times as necessary to adjust instruction Benchmark assessment in Reading, Writing and Mathematics in September, January, and May Teacher observations with actionable feedback Advance Dashboard Data Checks Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STAR online Reading and Math assessment (Fall Winter and Spring),TC performance Tasks, administered BOY and EOY, TC Pre and Post Unit Assessments 6 times per year, Fountas and Pinnell September, January and May, Unit Plans, lessons, end of unit tasks, On Demand writing, NYS Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our OORS indicated that a number of our students, especially third graders, exhibited behavior that is counterproductive in them achieving the standards for their grades. Some students had repeated episodes of aggressive behavior towards their peers. Some students did not choose peaceful ways to resolve conflicts on the school bus, in the classrooms and sometimes at lunch time activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will implement culturally sensitive instruction to support students' learning and engagement. This will result in a 10% decrease in number of behavioral infractions as evidenced by OORS data. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  4Rs (Reading, writing, Respect & Resolution. Teachers will teach seven units which are based on a book or story to deepen students understanding of the book and connect it to their lives. Teach conflict resolution lessons related to each theme. Create Peace Corners in each classroom. Boys Social Behavioral Intervention to Develop Character All students Sept - June I. Girls Social Behavioral Intervention to Develop Character. Students will work with teachers of their gender to use sports, dance, and physical fitness to teach problem solving and peer support to empower students to be positive members of our school community. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept to June  Principal  Assistant Principal  Teachers  Guidance Counselor  Male Teachers  Responsibility  Principal  Assistant Principal  Teachers School Messenger phone notification Parents Sept - June PrincipalAssistant All Students PrincipalParent CoordinatorPBIS TeamTeachersMagnet Theme Coordinator CAMBA East Flatbush Village 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families as Learning Partners (FALP) once per month families get to spend the first hour of the day in their children's classroom learning about a specific subject area. Family Engagement nights. Parent Coordinator parents workshops, Guidance Counselor workshops, PTA Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. o Per Session o Parent Involvement funds o Coaching/Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility o 4R’s Behavioral Intervention Kit Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly review of the OORS reports with a mid-point benchmark check in January. Monitor Weekly Behavior Logs for students showing signs of trouble Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports, teacher surveys, student surveys, behavior logs, classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Although all teachers consistently engage in the practice of checking for understanding throughout their lessons and students frequently participate in self-assessment, the practice of formulating data based groups and making timely and effective adjustments to instruction based on teachers’ formative appraisals, was not evident in the vast majority of classrooms. Consequently, their ability to leverage assessment data tools at the classroom level to provide targeted support to facilitate, advance, and extend learning for all students and to ensure that students in all classrooms are aware of their next learning steps is not maximized . We will conduct data dives and explore and use different formative assessments to revise lessons and unit plants to reduce students learning gaps and increase student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will deepen our use of formative assessment to create explicit learning objectives. In 2019 students will increase their independent reading levels and math by at least three levels as evidenced by the STAR online progress monitoring tool. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Implement progress monitoring tool: STAR. All teachers Sept to June I-Ready Every 6 to 8 weeks Data dives will be conducted every six to eight to look for trends across grades and make adjustments to units to increase student achievement All teachers Sept to June Teachers College Metamorphosis Revision of lessons, unit plans and curriculum maps and lesson plan objectives based on formative assessments and data from Data Dives All teachers Sept to June  Principal  Assistant Principal  RTI Team Leader  Teachers  Principal  Assistant Principal  AUSSIE Consultant  Teachers  Principal  Assistant Principal  Teachers/Grade Level Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families as Learning Partners (FALP) once per month families get to spend the first hour of the day in their children's classroom learning about a specific subject area. Family Engagement nights. Parent Coordinator parents workshops, Guidance Counselor Workshops, PTA Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TC Coach Per diem Per session Magnet CAMBA East Flatbush Village Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitoring will take place every 6-8 weeks using Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark System with a mid-point benchmark at the end of January. STAR progress monitoring tool for ELA and Math. September, February and June assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. BOY Benchmark, End of unit tasks, formative assessments such as exit slips, classroom observations, students discussions. STAR online assessment, On Demand assessment pieces Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school we have consistently develop and nurture teachers professional growth. Grade Leaders are empowered to conduct weekly meetings focused on reviewing units of study and formative assessment. The priority that will be addressed in this goal is to use formative assessment to revise unit and lesson plans to create rigorous tasks to help teachers teach more explicit scaffolded lessons so students can reduce their learning and increase their independent performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 We will increase our capacity. By June 2019 50% of teachers will have the opportunity to facilitate at least one professional learning session. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Common Prep for Grade Leaders & Monthly Grade Meetings using Protocols Pk - 5 Grade Leaders Sept - June Principal Monthly Aspiring Leaders Meeting with Admin Team Grade Leaders, Ambassadors Assistant Principal Sept - June Principal Assistant Principal Team Members Facilitate Professional Learning Sessions and Meetings Lead Teachers Sept - June Principal Ambassadors Network 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Assistant Principal Lead Teachers Sept - June Principal Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families as Learning Partners (FALP) once per month families get to spend the first hour of the day in their children's classroom learning about a specific subject area. Family engagement nights. Parent Coordinator parents workshops, PTA Meetings. Magnet Theme Coordinator meetings with parents. Newsletter to parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TC Staff Developer Assistant Principal led professional learning sessions Per diem subs Common Prep Professional Learning Time (Mondays & Tuesdays) 2018-19 CEP 25  District Ambassador meetings/PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher feedback/exit slips, Advance data, unit and lesson plans. Monthly feedback to teachers Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, Teacher feedback, classroom observations, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths o Weekly Parent outreach by classroom teachers and District Attendance teacher o Follow Up with absent students o Parent Contact Log Needs o Tardiness is high o Attendance is low Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 increase students attendance. By June 2019 we will demonstrate a 10% increase in the number of students achieving 95% or higher attendance monthly. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Combine student performance or activities with parent workshops/information session Parents Ongoing from September to June Principal Assistant Principal Increase the number of Grades 3 to 5 parents who attend at least 4 Families as learning Partners (FALP) by conducting school wide contests and incentives for the class with the most parents Parents Ongoing from September to June Teachers Students Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Students PTA Collaborate with PTA to increase the number of parents attending PTA meetings Parents Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principal Ongoing from September to June Monthly Attendance award Students Parents Ongoing from September to June Teachers PTA Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principal Teachers PTA Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. East Flatbush Village CAMBA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. General Supplies (paper, ink, materials for performances, etc.) Per session Parent Involvement funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitoring will take place monthly with a mid-point benchmark at the end of January using event sign in sheets Weekly monitoring of 407 attendance reports Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS, Renaisance STAR online reading assessment, Benchmark assessments, F & P Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students performing on 2 or more levels below grade standards according to Fountas & Pinnell reading assessment, student work, and teacher recommendation, State exam results State exam results, end of unit assessment results, students performing 2 or more levels below grade standards State exam results, Formative assessment results and end of unit assessment results Formative assessment results and end of unit assessment results Teacher recommendation, parent request, students with multiple OORS reports Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, Great Leaps, Leveled Literacy, Earobics, Focused Reading Intervention program, ReadyGen intervention program Go Math Intervention program, EngageNY, daily fluency builders, Focused Math intervention program Guided Reading, strategy based grouping Guided Reading, strategy based grouping Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group push-in program During the school day, after school Small group During the school day and after school Small group During the school day Small group During the school day Talk therapy and open dialogue Small group and one-to-one During the school day 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies (notebooks, bookbag, uniforms, etc), after school intervention, counseling Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31 Intervention, uniforms, supplies, trips/an 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. o Frequent cycles of observation using the Danielson Framework for Teaching with actionable feedback for teachers o Mentors for new teachers w/ weekly conferences for support o Grade Leaders meet frequently with grade level Team to ensure continuity and equity of instruction across grades o Vertical Teams 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). o We will work with grade level Teams to conduct data dives and revise lesson and unit plans based on recent developments in content-related pedagogy o Work with vertical teacher teams to make assessment for learning a part of our pedagogical DNA. We will learn how to have a finger on the pulse of a lesson and monitor for student learning as well as use the data gathered to adjust lessons in the moment and in the future o Teachers College Writing Project coach will work with teachers to improve Reading and Writing instruction for all students o TCRWP Principal as Curricular Leaders in Reading and Writing Professional Development o Metamorphosis Math PD 0 Leveled Literacy Intervention training will be provided by to all Cluster teachers to increase the effectiveness of Tier 2 intervention instruction o Book Study of How to Differentiate Instruction in Mixed Ability Classroom 2018-19 CEP 33  o Study of the text What Really Matter in Response to Intervention to use the information to strengthen our Tier! and Tier 2 intervention instruction o Marilyn Burns teaching of Mathematics o Core Curriculum PD for Go Math! Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). End of the Year Get Ready info session is held for parents and students Pre-K Teachers will meet with Kgn teacher for a share fair Parent/Student Welcome Orientation Breakfast in September 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. o Teachers work in Teams to determine the kinds of formative assessments to use based on the CCLS . o Each teacher will create a data binder of students assessment to use in revising lessons and units o The MOSL team will meet to determine the benchmark assessments used during the year. 2018-19 CEP 34  o Teacher teams will work with the data specialist to analyze and identify trends across grades. o 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Page 11 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 380,106.00 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 186,675.00 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,603,554.00 X X X Page 13 Page 15 Page 11 Page 13 Page 15 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 2018-19 CEP 35  to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. PS 198 Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 198 Brooklyn, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 2018-19 CEP 37  P.S. 198 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Saved Successfully The changes made to your 2017-18 CEP have been saved and are only visible to provisioned users at your school. NOTE: no reviewers or superintendents will see the changes you've made unless you click on Share For Review. You can do that by clicking the button beside SAVE or on the link below: The changes made to your 2017-18 CEP have been saved and are only visible to provisioned users in your district. SCHOOL - PARENT COMPACT P.S. 198 School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 198 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name PS 198 Magnet School for Applied Learnin Borough Brooklyn School Number 198 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joy-Ann Morgan Coach Assistant Principal Shantel Browne Coach Wendy Dechowitz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Bozhena Levine School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Alyssa Colarossi Superintendent Parent Aisha Joseph Parent Coordinator Tawana Wright Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) none C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 396 2018-19 CEP 44 Total number of ELLs 23 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.81%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): no If yes, indicate language(s): no Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELL students in grades K-5 are continuously assessed and grouped using prescriptive and diagnostic tools such as Fountas and Pinnell, Baseline Assessments, Unit Assessments and Performance Tasks to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Results from these assessments are shared, analyzed and discussed monthly, and are used by all teachers involved in the ELLs' education, including the ENL teacher, to further plan and implement targeted instruction for the ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ELL students in grades K-5 are summatively assessed using NYS ELA, NYS Math, NYC Performance Tasks, Baseline Assessments, ELL Periodic Assessment, NYSITELL, and NYSESLAT to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. 2018-19 CEP 45  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ELL students are provided equal access to all intervention programs and support services available in order to prepare them for standardized testing. Results from the citywide and statewide assessments are shared, discussed, analyzed and used by all teachers involved in the ELLs' education, including the ENL teacher, to further plan, provide necessary interventions, and implement targeted instruction for the ELL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the data gathered from the formative and summative assessments, ENL, classroom, and content area teachers co-plan and co-teach to provide ELL students with flexible grouping and rigorous, grade-level instruction in English and all content area subjects. ELL students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds are taken into consideration when planning instruction to support language development, content learning, and knowledge building while learning experiences are connected to ELLs’ background knowledge. ELL students are continuously provided with opportunities to work in pairs and small groups to further develop their language skills and to apply their knowledge while their understanding is routinely checked and they are always provided with opportunities to demonstrate their understanding in a variety of ways, including their native language. Homework assignments match ELLs’ current levels of English proficiency and provide additional practice opportunities for what was taught during class time. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELA, Math, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and NYS Science assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ELL program. The data is used to create and update instructional grouping, targeting weaker modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Results from these citywide and statewide assessments are shared, analyzed, and discussed monthly, and used by all teachers involved in the ELLs' education, including the ENL teacher, to further plan, group, and implement targeted instruction for the ELL students. Monthly reports are also sent to the parents to inform them of their child's progress. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is provided by a fully certified ENL Teacher in an integrated ENL Push-In / Pull-Out Program. The program model is ungraded and heterogenious. Students who are identified as Entering or Emerging level receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week as required under the CR Part 154. The ENL teacher pushes into the classrooms with ENL students and works with the classroom teacher to provide daily small group and differentiated instruction focusing on decoding strategies, letter-sound relationship, re-reading strategies, guided reading groups, editing, graphic organizers, writing mechanics, and skill oriented lessons for two 45 minute periods. Students also use Starfall.com website to acquire and practice their learned skills. The ENL teacher provides these students with instruction in ELA along with ENL instruction. Some ELA support is provided by the students’ classroom teachers. In addition, our neediest ENL students are pulled out by the ENL Teacher for four 45 minute periods each week for additional ENL support. 2018-19 CEP 46  Transitional and Expanding level students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week as required under the CR Part 154. The ENL teacher pushes into the classrooms with ENL students and works with the classroom teacher to provide daily small group and differentiated instruction focusing on re-reading strategies, guided reading groups, editing, graphic organizers, writing mechanics, and skill oriented lessons for four 45 minute periods each week. The ELA support for Transitional and Expanding level students is provided by the students’ classroom teachers. All four modalities are taught including listening with understanding, speaking, reading and writing. The students are actively engaged in a Standard based curriculum which is provided with high quality and rigorous instruction. The ENL teacher maintains portfolios of student progress in the program. These portfolios include pre-tests, diagnostic test results, attendance records, activities, post test scores and records of conferences, articulation and communication with administrators, classroom teachers and parents. The ENL teacher articulates with the students’ mainstream teachers to evaluate students’ work and data to ascertain the language and cognitive demands of tasks aligned to standards. P.S. 198 will continue to provide flexible grouping for students based on assessments. The ENL students will continue to participate in small group, task-oriented activities that guide the production of language both in verbal and written form. Students will continue to develop learning through measurable product development, demonstrations and exhibits. The ENL teacher will continue to collaborate with the mainstream teachers, and will continue to focus on differentiated learning styles to diversify the delivery of instruction. P.S. 198 will continue to provide instructional materials that are aligned with the school’s implementation of the Common Core State Standards and Core Curriculum and reflect the language of instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our goal for Social Studies is to improve skills and achievement for all students including the English Language Learners. Students will have additional exposure to informational text to meet Common Core State Standards. ELL students have access to the internet and an Open Access Library to further their research in the Social Studies content area. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Native Language support is used when needed and possible to support and evaluate our ELLs. This support is provided by pairing students up with a buddy who speaks the same language, as well as utilizing staff members who speak students’ Native Languages to conduct informal assessments, oral conversations, and translations to ensure full cooperation and understanding. We also provide our ELLs with an option to take the Content Area State Exams in their Native Languages by sending a translated letter explaining the option of taking the Content Area State Exams in the students' Native Languages home, supplemented by a phone call to parents by a staff member fluent in the students’ Home Languages to ensure parental understanding and cooperation. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 CEP 47  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We currently do not have any students who are SIFE. However, our plan for these students includes an assessment of their skills in their native language and in English. Any information supplied by the last school the student may have attended is reviewed. The parent survey is also utilized to facilitate background information to better service the student. Materials chosen are based on information acquired and the academic needs of the student. These students are given academic intervention (one-on-one, tutoring and Native Language intervention) accordingly, summer school, Saturday Academy, extended day, SES weekend tutorial, 4th grade ELA Intervention services, and Inquiry Team for ELL and Special Education as our Targeted Population students. The supports mentioned above afford students with opportunities to develop their language and content skills through extra support and small group focused around their needs. In addition, native language support is provided to the students falling under this category with books, dictionaries and bilingual glossaries in their native language. Some of these students come with social and emotional needs that may require counseling which is addressed by our counseling staff.Newcomers are first assessed in their native language and in English through informal assessments at registration and in their classrooms. The data is reviewed and students are grouped according to their proficiency level based on their NYSITELL or NYSESLAT data. Materials and instruction in the four modalities are provided to meet the needs of the students. These students are given ELA academic intervention services, since ELA testing is required for ELLs after one year. Within the classroom there is small group instruction and partner work, where students are paired according to language ability. Classroom libraries are filled with books on various levels to meet the needs of the students. Specific strategies and scaffolds such as small group instruction, hands-on activities, visuals, and technology (such as Smartboards, computers, listening center) are used in the classrooms to enhance learning.Students who have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years (Developing) continue receiving ENL services as well as ELA Intervention services, Saturday Academy, SES weekend tutorial, goal setting and constant assessment.We currently do not have any students who are long term ELLs. However, our plan for these students is as follows: These students would be assessed in order to determine what skills need to be developed for language acquisition. These students will participate in our ELA intervention program, Saturday Academy, SES weekend tutorial, goal setting and constant assessment. Some of these students might be referred to be evaluated to determine if there are any language barriers to their communication. Students who fall under this category usually show that their needs are in the areas of writing and reading and wells as content knowledge; and to support their needs, they will be given small group instruction with specific targeted needs. There would be an emphasis on hands-on approach to learning, visuals, and technology (such as Smart boards, technology lab) to meet the students’ needs.Former ELLs receive test accommodations, such as time and a half, separate location, native language support and exams translated in their native languages when available. In addition to testing accommodations, they continue to receive transitional support; this support varies according to students’ needs. Students are closely monitored for academic progress. Classroom teachers and ENL teacher communicate on a regular basis to ensure that sufficient academic progress is made. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use Project Based Learning, balanced literacy, push in and pull out ELL teacher instructional program. Teachers also use just right reading books, phonemic awareness lessons, Wilson, Great Leaps, and guided reading groups. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses project based learning, Universal Design for Learning, differentiated tasks, and Smart board technology (videos, web based videos, etc) to enable ELL-SWDs. Students are grouped according to their ability levels and the curriculum is differentiated to meet their needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 48  ELLs participate in Math Academy after school program, Math Saturday Academy, and AIS where they work in small groups. Students are selected based on state math exam, teacher recommendation and benchmark assessments. Activities range from the use of manipulatives, acting out math problems, Mathletics online math program and math games. In ELA, ELLs participate in ELA Guided Reading Intervention every morning, as well as the ELA after school and ELA Saturday Academy programs, and AIS where students are grouped based on their Fountas and Pinell reading levels as well as individual areas of need, and are provided with targeted instruction focusing on the decoding strategies, asking and answering questions, finding the main idea and supporting details, comparing and contrasting texts, and acting out different parts of text in character. Students are selected based on the ELA state exam, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, teacher recommendation, and benchmark assessments. All intervention services are provided in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, Project Based Learning curriculum units of study, Teacher's College Reading and Writing program, increased use of Fountas & Pinell, Leveled Literacy, web based enrichment and intervention are considered to be used for the upcoming school year. Lessons will be differentiated so that they include more language specific strategies for students to use when reading. We identified that many of our students are not meeting grade level standards on the ELA exam and are doing better in the area of math. Students are able to express themselves orally but are having difficulty expressing themselves in writing and answering specific questions. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are given opportunities to participate in Math Academy, Saturday Academy for ELA and Math, and Morning ELA intervention. All ELLs are also invited to participate in our music, dance, and Leadership after school programs. Translated letters are sent home explaining the programs and their benefits. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are currently using Teacher's College reading and writing program where the students' instructional materials are chosen based on students' ability levels and needs. Students are given iPads and computers to enhance and access the instruction. Smart boards are used to include the guidelines stipulated in the Universal Design for Learning continuum. In the area of math, students often use manipulatives and real world objects. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is used when needed and possible to support and evaluate our ELLs. This support is provided by pairing students up with a buddy who speaks the same language, as well as utilizing staff members who speak students’ Native Languages to conduct informal assessments, oral conversations, and translations to ensure full cooperation and understanding. We also provide our Newcomer grade 3-5 ELLs with an option to take the Content Area State Exams in their Native Languages. A translated letter explaining the option of taking the Content Area State Exams in the students' Native Languages is sent home, supplemented by a phone call to parents by a staff member fluent in the students’ Home Languages to ensure parental understanding and cooperation. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Team meetings, teacher formative assessments, and small group instruction 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? not applicable 2018-19 CEP 49  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are provided with an orientation explaining the school and class expectations and routines, supplies needed, available programs during and after school, and any other assistance they require. ELL teacher, Parent Coordinator, classroom teachers, and Assistant Principal are involved. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel will participate in professional development provided by the Assistant Principal and ELL teacher. The ELL professional development will take place during our Monday professional development sessions. Teachers of ELL students will participate in workshops that cover: The Common Core State Standards, new ENL Language Progressions, Overview of the NYSESLAT, ELL Baseline Assessment, Instructional Strategies for working with ELL Students, collaborative teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners . The ENL teacher will continue to discuss ENL strategies, methodologies, and students’ progress with classroom teachers. The ENL teacher through affiliation with professional organizations related to second language acquisition stays up to date with the current research on instruction of English Language Learners. The ENL teacher receives professional development from our Administrative Team, monthly ELL Ambassadors meetings, and professional development workshops attended. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 will be fulfilled through our Monday professional development sessions where teachers will participate in the professional development workshops listed above as well as through the monthly Ambassadors meetings for the designated teachers. The ELL teacher will be provided an opportunity to share information gleaned from her attendance at ELL meetings with all ELL personnel at the school. All agendas and attendance records for the school-based professional development activities are kept by the administrative team; all agendas for the out-of-the-building professional developments are kept by the teachers who attend them. 2018-19 CEP 50  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 198 uses the New York City parent survey to help identify the needs of all parents. Also, the parent coordinator and classroom teachers are in constant communication with all parents to make sure their needs are addressed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to our Families As Learning Partners activities that take place every third Friday of the month. During these sessions parents are given the opportunity to observe and participate in various subject areas. They are also invited to chaperone during school trips, attend school performances and assemblies, and be a part of our annual multicultural celebration. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Info to follow 2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joy-Ann Morgan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 198 Magnet School of Applie School DBN: 22k198 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joy-Ann Morgan Title Principal Shantel Browne Assistant Principal Tawana Wright Parent Coordinator Bozhena Levine ENL/Bilingual Teacher Aisha Joseph Parent Wendy Dechowitz Alyssa Colarossi none none Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Service Administrator Other Related Service Provider Other None Other None Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 9/7/17 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K198 School Name: The Magnet School of Applied Learni Superintendent: Ms. Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Shantel Browne Assistant Principal yes Bozhena Levine ENL Coordinator/Teacher No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess language preferences of the parent community for the written and oral communication via the Language ID Guide at the main office as well as the Parents' Guide to Language Access. If a language other than English is indicated, a member of the LAP team is called to assist the parent, initiate the registration process if necessary, and/or obtain translation and interpretation services through the T&I Unit or a staff member fluent in the parent's Native Language. We also use data obtained from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), ATS reports (i.e. QADM, RCPL), Student Emergency Contact cards, as well as the New York City parent survey to help identify the needs of all parents. School related information is distributed to parents of limited-English-proficient students in the languages they prefer to be contacted in, as well as in English. Also, the parent 2018-19 CEP 54  coordinator and classroom teachers are in constant communication with all parents to make sure their needs are addressed. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Haitian Creole English Spanish 2 15 398 10 0.47 3.52 93.43 2.35 2 16 397 10 0.47 3.76 93.19 2.35 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Annual Handbooks September Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements November, March, May NYS Testing Dates February/March After-School Program Information September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. 2018-19 CEP 55  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March, May Curriculum Nights November, March, May Families as Learning Partners (FALP) 3rd Friday of every month interpretation service(s)? We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. We will use Google translate, T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as utilize staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we will communicate with our limited-English-proficient families by utilizing staff members fluent in parents' Native Languages, the T&I Unit services provided by DOE, as well as Google translate to translate the text messages sent through the Remind app. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the beginning of the school year staff meetings, all staff members are made aware and sign off on all Chancellor's Regulations. Translation and Interpretation brochure and Language Palm Cards are available to staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 56   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Limited-English-proficient parents are made aware of their right to receive information through the translated signage, a welcome poster, translated brochures, flyers, and letters shared with parents, Parents' Guide to Language Assess, Language ID Guide at the main office, as well as PTA meetings, and parent orientation. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The New York City parent survey helps identify the needs of all parents, including the limited-English-proficient parents. Also, the parent coordinator and classroom teachers are in constant communication with all parents to make sure their needs are addressed. 2018-19 CEP 57 
