2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K208 School Name: P.S. 208 ELSA EBELING Principal: NAKOLEY RENVILLE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 208 The Elsa Ebeling Public School 18K208 331800010208 Pre-K to Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 4801 Avenue D Brooklyn, New York 11203 718 629-1670 Phone Number: 718 451-0185 Fax: Nakoley Renville nrenville@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Nakoley Renville Clare Daley Almika Tallerson Michelle Castro SydanaPassley-Smith none none District Information Beverly Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 East 95 th Street, Room 109, Brooklyn, New York 11236 BWilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-556-6008 Phone Number: Brooklyn FSC: 718-240-3791 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Mauriciere de Govia Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 5619 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn, NY mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759 3952 Phone Number: 718 759 3910 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nakoley Renville Clare Daley Almika Tallerson SydanaPassley-Smith Bettina Bazile Michelle Castro Queen Asemota *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Parent Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Natalie Francisco Gail-Ann Bishop Kimberley Nisbett Laverne Phillip Ms.SalmaGandour KayliaKelley CharissaJohn Assistant Principal Teacher Paraprofessional Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our School Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview At P.S. 208K we believe that students learn from what they say and do. This means that collectively we believe in providing students with frequent opportunities to engage in discussions, wonder, explore, question and be independent and critical thinkers. By placing emphasis on developing and fostering a more teacher structured, but student-led learning environment we continue to target student engagement. Our school family supports our students by providing targeted instruction based on data informed inquiry work in which teachers engage in frequent 2018-19 CEP 9  assessment of student progress. We provide access to learning experiences that lead to college and career readiness. We create a safe and inclusive environment that encourages students to take risks. We promote the values of accountability, collaboration and trust in order to inspire and propel our students to become outstanding citizens. We stand together as parents, school staff and the community to let our students know that they are cared for and that they matter! 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We have a responsibility to get students ready for state accountability measures, but we also understand that school must inspire curiosity, perseverance, resilience and self-discovery. In every neighborhood, schools are at the heart of a community. Schools prepare the next generation to take their places in the world. What happens at P.S. 208K will ultimately affect all of us in our regularly changing community and the greater world at large. The new school year will be a chance to reflect and start a chapter of growth and development for all stakeholders. Moreover, we strongly believe that teachers who are at the forefront of student achievement should receive regular and ongoing support and professional development. To support teachers as they work to develop their instructional practices, we plan to strengthen the following systems and structures: For the 2018/2019 school year, our vision at P.S. 208K is to provide all students with the skills necessary to become 21st century global citizens. We plan to focus on the following areas:  Engaging in targeted data-driven instruction where teacher teams engage in cycles of inquiry to determine student learning needs. Teachers work collaborative to plan instruction that intentionally targets the needs of all students (including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities). This means that teachers administer ongoing periodic assessment, decide on CCLS that they will target in the learning activities for groups of students, track student performance on student tasks and discuss "reteach" instruction based on student needs at Weekly Data Meetings, and engage in an observation/feedback cycle with the administrative team.  As a Learning Partners Program Host School (LPP) in the 2018-2019 school year we will be responsible for hosting a triad of schools and share some of our most effective practices. The focus for our work with other schools School practices that we will share include: our work with Weekly Data Meetings, our work with student-centered teaching in mathematics (Gradual Release of Responsibility/Upside-down Teaching).  Continuing to grow and develop a positive school by implementing our PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention System) behavior intervention system. At P.S. 208K we want to encourage students to make positive choices and support them in resolving conflict effectively. Through our GOTCHA ticket system we provide students with the ability to keep track of when they are practicing the 5 P's (positive, prepared, productive, prompt, polite). As we continue to promote restorative justice practices, students that engage in conflict are provided with mediation support at our Restorative Justice Room. Additionally, our class log binder system allows for all teachers to keep track of all types of student behaviors. The binder system allows for teachers, guidance counselor, and the administrative staff to notice and track trends in student behavior throughout the course of a week. The information and trends in student behaviors after staff members review the binders are often used to engage in conversations with students and families about how to we can provide with the individualized support that they need.  Building strong home/school link with our families through systems such as; invitations to student writing  publishing parties and sending out monthly newsletters across all grade levels. Implementing a rigorous S.T.E.M Curriculum in order for students to grow their thinking around science, technology, engineering, the arts, and mathematics.  Developing model teacher leaders whose skills will be leverage to lend support to their colleagues. In an effort to develop leadership capacity in our school a group of teachers are part of our core instructional team cabinet, our LPP team, and our vertical alignment team. Together with are teacher leaders the 2018-19 CEP 10  administrative team leads Weekly Data Meetings, conducts learning walks, and engage in classroom observation and feedback cycles. Our plan is to continue to empower our teachers by providing them with the opportunity to adjust curricula to target our student's learning needs. With the support of the curriculum and through staff development, we hope to continue building an empowered professional learning community to bring the most effective teaching to every student. We believe that all students including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities can achieve this vision by developing rigorous habits and higher-order thinking skills that are embedded in curricula and academic tasks. We want to foster a safe, nurturing and structured environment to meet the academic and socio-emotional needs of our students. Our goal is for school leaders and staff to effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness and successfully partner with families to support student progress. Our school community serves students in grades Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 5. We currently have over 400 students enrolled. Our population consists of 4% ENL students and 16% SWD's. 51% of students are male and 49% are females. There are 4% Hispanics students and 92% Black students. For the 2018-2019 school year, our school plans to put forth continued efforts for targeting our instructional focus. Our instructional focus is anchored on continued refinement of data informed learning targets, systems for assessing student learning, adjusting instruction based on a variety of assessment results, and planning for diverse learners. Our teachers and administrative team will continue to use various sources of data as well as focus on developing effective lesson planning practices, monitoring student understanding, and looking at school-wide data to inform our instruction. Beginning with the 2015-2016 school year, our school has formed a partnership with Learning Partners Program. Through this continued partnership for the 2018-2019 school year we want to continue to fortify our practices around using a variety of quantitative and qualitative data to drive our instructional decisions. We will be a Host School in the 2018-2019 school year and we will engage in several school intervisitations between a cohort of schools and engage in instructional planning meetings. Additionally, in the 2018-2019 school year we will continue implementing our Literacy Pilot Program (Spalding) in order to address the phonics learning needs of our Kindergarten through Grade 2 students. Also, most of our Kindergarten through Grade 2 teachers have received extensive training concerning phonemic awareness, phonics, and fluency. Teachers work daily with their students in order to improve thier reading foundational skills and work twice a week. With its multi-sensory approach to phonics instruction, the Literacy Pilot Program helps accelerate student achievement in fluency and reading comprehension. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 11  Special student populations at our school include: Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. These students require differentiated instruction designed to meet their learning needs (i.e., small group instructions, task accommodations/modifications, RTI (Response to Intervention) instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools Successes: One element in the Framework for Great Schools in which we experienced success was in Effective School Leadership where we set clear expectations in the following ways: 1. Systems and structures for the ongoing collection, monitoring and reviewing of grade level writing. 2. Providing school wide professional development concerning grade level writing assessment criteria. School leaders ensured that this criteria was developmentally appropriate as well as Common Core aligned across all grade levels. 3. School leaders established a system of inquiry cycles of learning for all grade teams, Pre-K-grade 5. 4. Data Dive Chats-discussions related to student outcomes in all content areas based on student data. 5. School leaders identified the school's problem of practice (POP) and created professional development supports to address these issues. One element in the Framework for Great Schools which can be highlighted as an area of focus is Rigorous Instruction as evidenced by the disparity of student engagement across some grades and classrooms. We plan to address this area of focus by providing teachers with professional development on Danielson Component 3C--Engaging Students in Learning, leveraging some teachers' strengths by forming an inter-visitation system. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K208 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 380 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 47 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 77.6% % Reduced Lunch 3.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.3% 4.7% 1.6% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 87% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 16 16 92.2% 3.9% 25.8% 91.3% 1.8% 0.5% 2 3% 7.6 26.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the school’s Quality Review, teachers at all grade levels need to strengthen their pedagogy to a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best by using the instructional shifts and the Danielson Frame work to guide the alignment of curricula to the standards, engaging students in learning and meeting the needs of all learners to improve all student learning outcomes. Also as we reflected on the 2017-2018 school year we discussed the work that we did with our Vertical Alignment Team regarding the "unpacking of standards". Through this work teachers were able to understand the demands of each standard and decide on learning objective and learning tasks that truly aligned to the standard. Our June Instructional Report for the 2017-2018 school year showed the following results:  Overall for grade 3-5 we went from 24% (2017) to 27% in mathematics in grades 3-5. (2018)  Grade 3: 31% (2017) to 38% (2018)  Grade 4: 18% (2017) to 23% (2018)  Grade 5: 22% (2017 and 2018)  Overall for grade 3-5 we went from 35% (2017) to 21% in ELA in grades 3-5. (2018)  Grade 3: 32% (2017) to 21% (2018)  Grade 4: 31% (2017) to 24% (2018)  Grade 5: 41% (2017) to 17% (2018) For school year 2018-2019 we will continue to build on the successes of school year 2017-2018 in the following ways: ● Continued professional development around Academic Rigor and student engagement which will include the the following initiatives - Reader's Workshop, Writer's Workshop, Math Workshop, Learning Partners Program, Literacy Pilot Program, and Super Science Fridays. ● We will continue to revise our unit plans/pacing calendars to meet the needs of all of our diverse learners throughout the school year. ● The Vertical Alignment Team and the Core Instructional Team will continue to collaborate, organize and create professional development in order to support teachers and paraprofessionals around Academic Rigor and Student Engagement to include: Effective Student Feedback, Accountable Talk, Multiple Entry Points, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and Monitoring Student Understanding and Student Engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 14  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will raise the level of rigorous instruction. This will be evidenced by a 5% increase in grades 3-5 meeting proficiency in the ELA and Math State assessments. Modifications to the curricula will also be made in order to include the needs of our Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teachers will continue to participate in a professional learning opportunity series focused on the Common Core Learning Standards aligned programs. This will allow for the development of a common lens and methodology when dissecting the programs and determining a unified approach to its implementation. In regard to our Curriculum/Consensus mapping and unit planning we will continue to collaboratively engage in a reflective process to determine areas yet still needing to be enhanced due to our varying population of learners. Teachers will be given an opportunity to make adjustments to their Unit plans and unit based on our reflective practices due to our varying population of learners. ● Teachers will continue to lead in grade level refinement of their practice, planning and implementation through the collaborative design of coherent instruction as we consistently merge our ELA and Math programs with the Common Core Learning Standards setting the bar for our expectations. Teacher Teams are facilitated by Grade Leaders as well as our Vertical alignment team. ● The grade level teacher teams meet during their scheduled weekly common prep periods and/or during the afternoon Professional Development Mondays to engage in professional work. During this planning time, the teachers collaboratively engage in conversations about what has been successful and challenges experienced during the implementation of specific lessons. Teachers reflect on and analyze student work/data using our school based protocol. ● The Curriculum-Consensus Map/Vertical Alignment Team will meet bi-monthly in order to evaluate the curriculum for gaps, coherence and repetitions. ● Our Response to Intervention Team (RTI) will meet with classroom teachers every 6-8 weeks in order to analyze student data, student progress reports, student work and create and share action plans/next steps for RTI students Teachers, Administrators and Lead Teachers All Teachers Cycle 1: September 2018-November 2018 Cycle 2: January 2019- March 2019 Cycle 3: April 2019- June 2019 Teachers November 2018- Teachers January 2019 2018-19 CEP 16 based on this ongoing analysis for students in grades K-5 with classroom teachers and parents monthly. March 2019- May 2019 Teachers ELA/Math September 2018 Teachers November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Weekly Math Performance Tasks Each Month September-June (newsletters) Daily/Weekly (blackboard connect) Weekly/Monthly Teachers ● Periodic assessments will be used to track student progress throughout the school year for all students in grades K-5. Fountas and Pinnell assessments will be used for students in grades kindergarten-grade two in order to track their progress in reading. Math Review and Math Pre and Post Assessments will be used to track student performance in mathematics. ● Parents will receive a monthly newsletter which will highlight areas of celebration as well as specific areas that our school is working on to support students. Teachers Blackboard Connect will be used to notify parents of upcoming school events. ● Teacher will continue to conduct parent engagement workshops in order to share best practices in math and English Language Arts that parents can use at home to support their children with activities and articles that support Academic Rigor and the Common Core Learning Standards. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. For the 2018-2019 school year, we plan to establish a system that facilitates ongoing communication with students, families, and teachers.  Providing in-school workshops on a variety of topics that support student academic a socio-emotional achievement.  Offering parents opportunities through meeting to discuss student achievement issues, including assessment data (i.e., reading level data, periodic assessment data) with teachers and the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  ● Teachers, paraprofessionals, Teachers College- Reading and Writing Philosophy , Conceptual Mathematics approach to teaching (Investigations Program, Fountas and Pinnell, Learning Partners Program, SMART boards, iPads, and other resources. Additionally, we will use Parent Involvement allocations to implement the Global Messenger service to notify parents of upcoming school events and Learning Leaders Inc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in by 5% in students assessments. All teachers in grades K-5 will use the Measure of Student Learning Performance Based assessments two times a year-fall and spring, RTI Tier 1 and Tier 2 Packet assessments the Teachers College Reading and Writing Running Records, benchmark assessments three times a year- fall, bi-weekly Math Performance Tasks. We will administer in February 2018 a midpoint assessment to track student progress at this point in the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of measure will be the mathematics pre and post unit assessments throughout the year. Teachers College Running records benchmark assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  Based on our assessment of our school’s academic program in response to a supportive environment, we have created a needs assessment survey for all teachers. Teachers took this survey in June of 2018 and are developing a professional development plan for teachers which meets their areas of challenge. Our trends according to the Danielson frame work show that teachers need support around assessing students in learning, questioning and discussion techniques and engaging students in learning. Our professional development will be targeted to this data as well. The following are some data sources that allowed for us to notice some of our school's priority needs and were used to plan for developing a more supportive learning environment:  Quality Review: Well-developed rating in School Culture indicators 3.4 (establishing a culture for learning that  communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families). School Survey 2018: Data shows that our score was 3.50 out of 5 for QR Indicator 1.4 (maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 our school will go from proficient to well-developed (3.5 (proficient) to 5 (well-developed) in maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults on our Quality Review and School Quality Guide results. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● We will implement and review PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports) system throughout our school. Students Sept. 2018- All staff members ● All members of the school community including, School safety Officers, cafeteria, classroom teachers, and support staff will have GOTCHA practicing the 5 P's (referenced above) to support positive behaviors. November 2018 (review PBIS impact) November 2018- January 2019 (review PBIS impact) January 2019- March 2019 (review PBIS impact) March 2019- May 2019 (Review PBIS impact). ● An analysis of Individual Education Plans goals took place in order to align the effective aspects of bucks to all stakeholders. Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers, support staff, Guidance counselor This Positive Behavior intervention system rewards and encouraged positive behaviors School Community Sept 2018- All staff June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 20  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement to take place via: 1. Parent Engagement meetings (Tuesday workshops) 2. School Leadership Team meeting (monthly) 4. Parent Corps-weekly meeting with parents of Pre-K and Kindergarten students around behavior management and parenting skills.  Providing in-school workshops on a variety of topics that support student academic a socio-emotional achievement.  Offering parents opportunities through meeting to discuss student achievement issues, including assessment data (i.e., reading level data, periodic assessment data) with teachers and the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  After-school Test Prep (10-12 sessions for 1 1/2 hours) (9 teachers and 1 supervisor)  Saturday School Test Prep/Enrichment (7 sessions for 21 hours) (9 teachers and 1 supervisor) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By January 2019, we will conduct a in-school learning environment survey to gauge progress toward meeting our annual goal (raising our performance in QR indicator 1.4). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Analyzing the in-school learning environment survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Teachers work collaboratively during common planning to revise and refine curriculum based on effectively developed inquiry practices. Grade level and vertical inquiry teams meet bi monthly in order to discuss student progress, identify strengths and areas of challenge, common trends and implications for teacher practice. Data trends include low performance on the state exams in ELA and math, most specifically student interpretation od non fiction text, our running records show that a majority of our students are reading below level. In mathematics, students have difficulty in determining the meaning in multi-step problems and explaining their math process in writing. Needs: To increase students’ writing proficiency by progress monitoring through the use of baseline, mid year and end of year assessments. To continue to support teachers around the Danielson Components of 3b, 3c and 3d. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all (100%) teachers will be provided with ongoing professional learning opportunities and support to develop a culture of collaborative professional learning which enables school and individual development as measured by a 5% level of growth in individual data gathered from informal and formal observations using all Danielson's components with a focus on components 3b, 3c and 3d. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Administration will support teacher growth that shifts teacher practices through a minimum of four informal observations followed by specific, actionable, and timely feedback. ● All teachers will participate in professional development that will better inform their practice in all Danielson's components to improve pedagogical delivery with special emphasis on Danielson’s components 3b, 3c, and 3d. ● Development of a specific team to analyze the work of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups such as students in temporary housing. All Teachers Sept 2018- Administration, Lead Teachers June 2019 All Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administration, Lead Teachers Teachers Sept 2018- Administration, Lead Teachers June 2019 Teachers in all teams use protocols to analyze data and student work. We will engage in Weekly Data meetings that will provide support for all grades K-5. ● We provide opportunities for parent meetings during our Tuesday parent-outreach time. Parents Sept 2018- Administration, Teachers June 2019 ● We welcome parents to observe classes which occur regularly (i.e., during writing publishing parties). ● We highlight student successes during our monthly PTA meetings by holding awards ceremonies based on academic and social-emotional growth observed in the school setting. ● The use of protocols allows for teachers to share and trust each other via common expectations and accountability. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Providing in-school workshops on a variety of topics that support student academic a socio-emotional achievement (monthly/conducted by grade teams). 2018-19 CEP 23    Student-led conferences in grades 3-5 allow parents opportunities to discuss student achievement issues, including assessment data (i.e., reading level data, periodic assessment data) with teachers and students. (twice a year/conducted by teachers and students) Student reading logs are sent home every night by the teacher as a home/school reading tracking tool. (daily/conducted by teachers and students).  Grade teams collaboratively create weekly homework assignments for students to establish grade-wide coherence. (weekly/conducted by teachers).  Parent newsletters are developed collaboratively by grade teams each month. (weekly/conducted by teachers). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  After-school Test Prep (10-12 sessions for 1 1/2 hours) (9 teachers and 1 supervisor)  Saturday School Test Prep/Enrichment (7 sessions for 21 hours) (9 teachers and 1 supervisor) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019 75% of teachers will obtain a effective rating in components 3b-Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c- Engaging Students in Learning and 3-d. Assessing Student Learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By June 2019, all (100%) teachers will be provided with ongoing professional learning opportunities based on the Danielson Rubric (The instrument of Measure) and support to develop a culture of collaborative professional learning which enables school and individual development as measured by a 5% level of growth in individual data gathered from informal and formal observations using all Danielson's components with a focus on components 3b, 3c and 3d. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Using the Advance Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Dashboard we have analyzed the data from both informal and formal observations and identified the following as indicated by the Danielson Framework: 6.3% of teacher were rated "developing" in the 2017-2018 school year. Strengths: Providing professional learning based on 3c, 3b and 3d as well as professional learning targeted toward individual teacher needs. Administrators will conduct observations, and teachers and administrators will continue to engage in meaningful post observation conferences, discuss rubric-based evidence from the lesson and collaboratively planning for next steps in order to improve practice. Needs: Students need to be able to initiate higher order thinking questions, extend discussions as well as challenge one another’s thinking. High level student thinking and explanation should be evident in all lessons Students should have the opportunity for reflection at the end of a lesson in order to consolidate their understanding. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 15% increase in the number of teachers delivering effective or highly effective instruction with a focus on questioning and discussion techniques and engaging students in learning as evidenced by teacher ratings at the end of the school year as compared with 2017- 2018. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Specific, actionable, timely feedback on classroom observations and inter-visitations on instructional practices for ELL and Students with Disabilities. All Teachers Rated Under Advance Sept. 2018- Administrative Team and Lead teachers June 2019 Continue to analyze student performance data for English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities ( formative and summative) to identify the achievement gaps and the general population of the school. All Teachers Rated Under Advance Sept. 2018- Administrative Team June 2019 For the English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, the Response to Intervention teachers will meet on a monthly basis to analyze student work to notice trends and gaps in student performance. All Teachers Rated Under Advance Sept. 2018- Administrative Team June 2019 Allocate time for teachers to modify and refine questions, activities, lesson plans, curriculum maps, based on knowledge from professional learning All Teachers Rated Under Advance Sept. 2018- Administrative Team and Lead teachers June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Providing in-school workshops on a variety of topics that support student academic a socio-emotional achievement.  Offering parents opportunities through meeting to discuss student achievement issues, including assessment data (i.e., reading level data, periodic assessment data) with teachers and the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Danielson Framework for Teaching, various articles, Talent Development Coach, professional development, Quality Review Rubric, Mentor and Superintendent Visits 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will show progress by 3% on their Fountas and Pinnell and Teachers College Running Record Assessments as well as their Mid year math assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be the Fountas and Pinnell and Teachers College Running Record Assessments as well as their Mid year math assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Ongoing learning walks provide data regarding current state of classroom environments and teacher pedagogy. (qualitative data is used as we use a classroom environment/pedagogy checklist that captures real-time trends). 2. We engage in observation feedback cycles. (Advance data) 3. We engage in weekly data meetings in math to conduct inquiry work to hep raise student achievement by identifying gaps in student learning. (student work is analyzed (high/medium/low). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 95% of teachers will display growth (scoring effective or highly effective) in their Advance ratings in Domain 3 (Instruction). 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a parent needs assessment to gather information on the types of workshops that parents would like to attend as well as the times that would be most convenient. All Parents Sept. 2018- November 2018 Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator November 2018- January 2019 January 2019- March 2019 March 2019- May 2019 Implement specific family outreach programs to ensure that parent attend workshops and other school functions (i.e., more correspondence inviting parents to functions, asking for families to volunteer to coordinate school functions). Teacher will use their parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to provide parents with workshop that focus on academics, homework, literacy, math. Parents will be provided with information on how to support students with disabilities and English Language Learners. All Parents Sept. 2018- Parent Coordinator, Administrative Team June 2019 All Parents Sept. 2018- All Teachers June 2019 Invite parents to volunteer in the classrooms. All Parents Sept. 2018- Parent Coordinator, Administrative Team June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Parent Corps  Brooklyn Arts Council (CASA)  Time In 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Global Connect, Parent Website, School Wide calendar, Remind App, Class DOJO app Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our school will create a school environment by which families will increase their attendance at school events by 5% as compared to school year 2017-2018. This will be measured by the recorded amount of families that attend PTA from September through February as well as the measured quantity of families that attend parent workshops from September to February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Using parent engagement workshop logs to calculate and document the increase in families that attend workshops and PTA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Determining students who are not meeting interim benchmarks (i.e., Performance Task Assessments, Running Records) by analyzing assessment results during inquiry team teacher team meetings. Analyzing students work samples during inquiry team meetings (i.e., writing samples). Students are assessed every for to six months. Those not meeting benchmarks will be invited for intervention services. State exam scores will also be used for students in grades 4 and 5. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, shared reading, read aloud, and interactive writing, book clubs. Homeworkhelp/tutoring Guidedreading with EnglishLanguage Artsteachers Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction following mini lessons to address individual student needs. One-on-one conferring sessions with students. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day in either push in or pull out services. During our academic intervention after school program. Strategy groups based on student learning needs (i.e., strategy groups on literacy skills) . Problem of the Day Math Review SOLVE Method mathematics strategy. Homeworkhelp/tutoring,(example: guidedmath with Response to Intervention (RTI) teachers Small group instruction One-on-one conferring During school day in either push in or pull out services. During our academic intervention after school program. 2018-19 CEP 31  Science Social Studies Theanalysis of student performance data during Super Science Fridays. Theanalysis of student performance data (i.e., analyzing student writing in social studies). Guided math practice during strategy groups. Homeworkhelp/tutoring,(example: guidedmath with Response to Intervention (RTI) teachers Small group instruction One-on-one conferring Document Based Questions and repeated Readings Small group instruction. Homework help/tutoring, (example: guided During school day in either push in or pull out services. During our academic intervention after school program. During the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Individual Counseling reading with Response to Intervention (RTI) teachers One on one and group counseling. Crisis Counseling Social Skills Training Restorative Justice circles One on one and group counseling During The school day. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 14 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be provided with the necessary supplies and uniforms. Students will also be provided with hot breakfast and lunch. The school will also pay for school trips and outings. Students will have the option of participating in our after-school program. Students will receive RTI services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Professional Development will be provided by teacher experts in our school building. All teachers in our school are Highly Qualified according to the BEDS ( Basic Educational Data System) Report. This is done in order to build capacity in our school. Select teachers will turnkey best practices to their colleagues and all teachers are provided with professional development in Mathematics (Math in Focus) to improve their pedagogy in order to improve student performance . Our School has coordinated a hiring committee that organizes and interviews prospective candidates in order to ensure that potential staff is suitable for the school community. New teachers are paired with a mentor and are assessed by administrators on an on-going basis to determine effectiveness. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development is provided for teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals to enable all students to meet the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals are given workshops on strategies and activities to improve instruction and to meet students’ needs. An instructional coach has also been acquired to develop teachers to allow all students to have access to the curriculum. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). An Open House was established to invite parents and children to visit kindergarten classes over two days. On the first day, Pre- school children with kindergarten buddies participated in arts and crafts. On the second day, parents of these transitioning children came in to view the kindergarten curriculum and to view a demonstration lessons given by the kindergarten teachers. The teachers also provide the parents with tips to help students transition from Pre-K to Kindergarten. Also, we coordinate open houses for prospective families of Pre-K and K students. Additionally, in an effort to support the families of Pre-K students, our school has adopted the Parent Corps program. Through Parent Corps, families gain support in dealing with the challenges of raising and educating children. The goal is to enhance the use of evidence-based practices for strengthening home-school connections and promoting social, emotional, and behavioral skills. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During our inquiry team the teachers will receive the opportunity to make instructional decisions regarding the common assessments (i.e., writing pre/post assessments) that they will administer to the students in order to collect ongoing data. Teachers will use the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure that assessments are CCLS-aligned assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 36  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) school allocation amounts) Column A Verify with an (X) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 316,248.00 136,474.00 0 0 2,046,362.00 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 4b 5c NA NA 6a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 37   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 208, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 208 Elsa Ebeling will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  As per our action plan, the school will create a parent needs assessment to gather information on the types of workshops that parents would like to attend as well as the times that would be most convenient. ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 208 Elsa Ebeling, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  As per our action plan, using parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons to provide parents with workshop that focus on academics, homework, literacy, math. Parents will be provided with information on how to support students with dissabilities and English Language Learners. ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  As per our action plan, implementing specific family outreach programs to ensure that parent attend workshops and other school functions (i.e., more correspondence inviting parents to functions, asking for families to volunteer to coordinate school functions). ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Elsa Ebeling Borough Brooklyn School Number 208 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nakoley Renville Coach Mrs. Asemota ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alisa Lifshitz Teacher/Subject Area Science - Miss Stevenson Teacher/Subject Area Library Mrs. Castro Related-Service Provider SETSS - Ms. Francis Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Natalie Filipkowski Coach N/A School Counselor Lisa Hobson Parent Ms. Almika Tallerson Parent Coordinator Ms. Hudlin-Miller Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 355 2018-19 CEP 46 Total number of ELLs 14 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Fountas and Pinnell as a system of reading levels .. Reading text is classified according to word count, number of different words, sentence length, sentence complexity, word repetitions, and illustration support. This is important so we know what books the student can read on their level. We can see how the ELL students can progress from that level. The school also uses the MOSL and ELA baseline exam. This is the measure of student learning. Since there is no historical data on the kindergarten students this data helps place the ELL student into the right group for reading, and writing with differentiated instruction. The classroom teachers and the ENL teacher after receiving the data, collaborate on instructional practices. This data drives our instruction. It pinpoints what our students need the most help in and what they need to make progress. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that we have in place help celebrate student growth and provide next steps for instruction.Teacher's keep portfolios of student writing samples.This shows individual student growth over time.During school data meetings and 2018-19 CEP 47  conferences the work is examined.Teachers work with students to create goals for using academic language.This is done through goal setting,peer assessment activities and self-assessment.There is teacher team planning at each grade level.There is data driven instruction and meetings with the data analysis team.There are professional learning community meetings for collaboration with ELL specialists.We use academic conversations to explain new learning.Graphic organizers are used to structure note-taking.Student-teacher conferences,small group discussions, cloze activities,drawing and role-playing, self checklists or peer-checklists are some of the supports we use.Student generated questions from their peers.Exit slips are used to guide instruction.Students give each other feedback on their work 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is evaluated using the EDAT tool through this tool you can see whether the students made adequate progress. You can see if the school made AYP (adequate yearly progress). the NYSESLAT assessment test is evaluated to see if the students moved up into higher levels of achievement. It also shows where students need additional help. During the year the ELL Periodic assessment tool is used in grades 3-5 to evaluate strengths and needs of our ELL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The Inquiry Team uses data to identify changes in instructional practice that will accelerate learning .This is part of the school improvement strategy.The team works with school staff to implement and monitor system level change to benefit the students.Teacher teams evaluate scores and alignment of the curriculum.The ENL teacher addresses the area of student need and works in small groups and individually with the ENL student.Data is compared each month to show growth and where there is still need for improvement. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For each ELL student who scores below the yearly English language proficiency assessment the students receives additional support services. When we determine the support services given we take into consideration the number of years of instruction in English as a new language, English and home language literacy, results of the NYSESLAT, English and home language literacy needs of long term ELL's, English as a second language teacher recommendation and students with inconsistent interrupted formal education. The students that fall into these categories are given academic intervention services every day with the rest of the students in the school. Their progress is monitored and parent reports are sent home. A strong response to intervention model is in place which provides ELL's with rigorous, culturally responsive instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL is an exam that determines ELL status. It is administered throughout the school year. There are 5 levels, the last level indicates that the student is not in the program. this test determines, student's language proficiency levels. The data determines how many minutes of ENL the student will receive a week. The entering student will receive 360 minutes per week of ENL units of study. The emerging student will also receive 360 minutes of ENL service per week. The transitioning and expanding student will receive 180 minutes per week. The commanding student will receive 90 minutes per week for two years. When I tested my students with the NYSITELL I found I have one newcomer who could not answer any questions. I have one student who is transitioning and had schooling for one year and one student who is expanding. This data gives the teacher a guideline for language instruction. It helps you determine what the student knows about language and what group you can put them in for instruction. The NYSESLAT test is an exam that we administer to all ELL's in grades K-5. this test determines continued entitlement of ELL services, progress in learning English, proficiency level and the number of units of ENL for the following school year. During the Spring 2016 NYSESLAT test of my eight students three are in the expanding group, three are in the transitioning and two were in the commanding level. The data patterns show that the students have made significant progress in speaking, reading and listening. They need more instruction in writing skills. 2018-19 CEP 48  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers will use small group instruction,differentiated scaffolds and supports, on going formative assessments to keep monitoring for progress in both ELA and Math.English language learners will be exposed to social and academic language n classrooms and their language acquisitions will be supported by specialized programs [Imagine Learning}and the trained ENL teacher.We will continue to engage families and supporting their understanding of rigorous instruction so they can help their children at home.Results are examined by teacher teams and te data team to ensure proper grouping and lesson planning.Data driven lessons are planned to ensure success.The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We consider many factors for delivering a successful instructional program. There are high expectations for ELL student achievement. Through informal and formal assessments progress is monitored. Instruction is geared according to the evidence of the assessment data. The curriculum and instruction are aligned to the CCLS Standards. There is ample planning time and time to collaborate with teachers and administrators. The administration and teachers know the needs of the ELL population. Parent and community involvement are always welcomed. Instruction is delivered through the balanced literacy approach to reading. We use read aloud, guided reading shared reading, interactive writing, writing process, listening centers and independent reading according to the student's level. Literacy instruction is taught during our 25 minute instructional block and our 37 1/2 minute extended day program. The push-in model is used for ENL instruction. ELL's who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together for various classes for English acquisition focused instruction. The ENL teacher plans carefully with the general education and special education teachers to ensure curriculum alignment. Students are seen according to their grade level using homogeneous proficiency levels. a. What are the organizational models (e.g., Departmentalized, Push-In [Co-Teaching], Pull-Out, Collaborative, Self-Contained)? The instruction is delivered through a Freestanding ENL program. It is the push-In model .When instruction is grouped , we do not use more then two contiguous grades. b. What are the program models (e.g., Block [Class travels together as a group]; Ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class]; Heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels]; Homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class])? The students are seen in groups with the same proficiency levels. ENL instruction provides instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. We use both types of ENL. The stand alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so the student can succeed in common core courses. It is delivered by a 2018-19 CEP 49  certified ENL teacher Mrs. Lifshitz. Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by Mrs. Lifshitz and a certified content area teacher in ELA, Math, Science or Social Studies. Both of these methods include content area subjects and English language development using ENL strategies. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL instructional minutes for each group are built into the ENL teachers program. The entering and emerging groups are seen for the 360 minutes per week and the transitioning and expanding group is seen for 180 minutes per week. Former ELL's are seen for 90 minutes a week. In the freestanding ENL program language arts is taught using ENL and ELA methodologies. Content areas are taught in English using ENL strategies. Native language support is also provided. The entering and emerging level students are given 360 minutes of ENL a week and transitioning and expanding are given 180 minutes per week. ENL students who are not achieving growth on reading assessments receive an additional 30 minutes per day of literacy instruction during our instructional block and extended day services. These students also see the AI literacy teacher for small group instruction. This will help the ELL achieve grade-level proficiency in each reading component. The mandated ENL minutes for each ELL are built into the ENL teacher’s schedule. The ELL student who achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT test will be seen for 90 minutes a week for a two year period. Integrated ENL instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher who is dually certified..She teaches English language development using ENL strategies and content area subject matter.All ELLS and former ELLS receive units of integrated ENL instruction according to proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. . The ENL teacher meets with the content area teachers to find out what the student is having difficulty with. The ENL teacher uses the hands-on approach to teaching to help the ENL student. The ENL student is also given help on the computer. Academic content areas are taught using ENL approaches, techniques and strategies. We use pictures, graphic organizers, charts, balanced literacy, read -aloud, guided reading and guided writing. The ENL teacher articulates with the classroom teachers to ensure that the ELL students are progressing with all subject areas. The ENL teacher uses hands-on manipulative for math instruction, ex *cubes, base 10 blocks) to further break down problems. A math vocabulary word wall is also set up in the ENL room to help with math word problems. Hands-on science activities are used to enhance science instruction. Maps are used in conjunction with social studies lessons. The ENL teacher uses the sheltered English approach in her lessons. This approach helps ensure that students understand the content while expanding their English Language development. The ENL teacher makes adjustments so that the lesson is comprehensible to ELLs. These are some of the things that are done. When giving explanations and directions, simple sentences are used that students are familiar with. Students are then able to focus on the content of the lesson rather than on the lesson procedures. The ENL teacher will speak at a normal rate, so students can comprehend. The ENL teacher focuses on 2018-19 CEP 50  vocabulary related to the topic, and does not teach a long vocabulary list: The ENL teacher emphasizes reading, writing and thinking skills. Activities that are used are group problem solving, report writing, and note taking. The ENL teacher also uses scaffolding techniques to help the ELL student. Teacher modeling, visuals, graphics and cooperative learning are used by the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher uses the scaffolding handbook for ELL's from the Teachers College literacy program bilingual picture dictionaries and picture dictionaries are used for native language support to foster language development. Some of the materials for content areas are: science, Harcourt NYC Edition, Everyday Math program, Envision Math Common Core, NYC Social Studies, Houghton Mifflin, Finish Line Reading for the Common Core Standards, Finish Line for ELLs English Proficiency Practice and Empire State NYSESLAT continental Press. The ENL teacher uses the whole language based approach to reading. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language by using bilingual evaluators. If additional translations are needed, we use the translation services unit form the Department of Education. The school psychologist, social worker and family worker will work closely with the family to make sure the ELL student is evaluated in their native language. When a student enters the New York City public schools and their home language was determined to be Spanish a Lab-R test is given in English, and a Spanish Lab Lab-R is administered. The Lab-R will determine the students language dominance. The Spanish Lab is given by the Spanish teacher, Ms. Elizabeth Ramos. This ensures that the ELLs are evaluated in their native language. The ELL student is screened using the MOSL ELA baseline assessments to help determine whether or not the student is in need of a language instruction educational program. The assessment helps to identify ELL's and to place the student in a differentiated group that meets his/her needs. If an ELL student is referred for Special Education services, the school psychologist and social worker determine if a bilingual evaluator is needed for the student and if an interpreter is needed for the parents. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a. Describe your instructional plan for SIFE. SIFE students need extra help with language development due to less schooling. They are given work books on their level to help them achieve success. The classroom teachers are given extra materials to work with these students. The SIFE ELL has to be assessed whether he/she has some academic skills and some English, Academic skills and no English, some skills and no English or no prior school and no English. The SIFE student will get the same testing accommodations as all ENL students. To help the SIFE student we use cooperative learning, leveled books, communicative activities, Balanced literacy, multicultural education, guided reading, test taking strategies, integrative learning environments, writing process, meta-cognitive learning, graphic organizers, a print rich environment, access to books and collaborative teaching. SIFE students receive instruction in literacy and content preparation in math, science, social studies, computer, spanish and library skills. Native language support is provided.. 2018-19 CEP 51  b. Describe your plan for ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers). Additionally, because NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, specify your instructional plan for these ELLs. For newcomers there are listening centers set up in their classrooms and classroom teachers are given books on their levels to use. The newcomer who is here less than 3 years will be given an assessment to see what words they recognize, letter names, phonemic awareness, and concepts of print. According to the results the lessons will be geared as to what the ELL student needs and weaknesses in the four modalities of listening, reading, writing and speaking. If a student needs help in listening, he will do work to improve his skills in the listening center. Listening centers are in the classrooms as well as the ENL room. If the student needs help in writing, assignments will be given and the fundamentals of writing will be taught. We use the writing process for the student to achieve maximum growth. There will be lessons in accountable talk to help the ELL student speak in front of a group. Also these lessons will be taught through scaffolding strategies. The group is actively engaged in standard-based academic curriculum. There is a great deal of modeling, which includes doing a required task together first and providing students with clear examples. Test prep lessons are taught to prepare the students for the NYS tests as well as the NYSESLAT test. c. Describe your plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years. ELL students receiving service for 4 to 6 years are invited to extended day and receive response to intervention for extra reading help. They may also be referred for RTI during the school day. Their ELL interim assessments are utilized to drive instruction. Their NYSESLAT scores are reviewed to see where help is needed. ELL students receiving service of 4 to 6 years are given additional help in our extended day. They are also invited to the Saturday Test Prep Program. Language Arts is taught using ENL and ELA methodologies. Content areas are taught in English using ENL strategies. Native Language support is provided. Literacy based computer programs (eg. Image Learning English, Study Island and Starfall) are used to enhance the ELL students proficiency level. d. Describe your plan for Long-Term ELLs (completed 6 years). For long-term ELL's the ENL teacher works with the classroom teacher to see where most help is needed. The results of the interim assessment and the NYSESLAT score is used to drive instruction. Describe your plan for ELLs identified as having special needs. Students with special needs are given the mandates on all tests. They are grouped with their level according to the NYSESLAT results. We provide activities that are varied, motivating and challenging according to language proficiency, grade and ability level. These students must also acquire more advanced listening/comprehension skills in English which is accomplished through listening centers, story dictations and the balanced literacy approach to reading. Instruction must emphasize English reading and writing skills. Students with disabilities will be seen by the ENL teacher and given instruction in English listening, comprehension and speaking skills. Reading and writing skills are introduced appropriately after conferring with the special education teacher about the student's progress. The special education student is included in all programs given at the school (eg. after school, extended day, SETSS, RTI Services). e. After former ELLS achieve proficiency. I make sure that they are still given the testing modifications on State Tests for two years. They are invited to all school programs and Title III after school programs. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to ensure that the teacher is aware that the student was a former ELL. The parent receives a letter in their home language that the student has tested out of the ESL program. Transitional services are provided for former limited English proficient students for two years. During this time instructional and support services such as AIS must be provided to former LEP/ELLS when the monitoring of their progress indicates a need for intervention. Any services that would help the student continue to progress toward the Common Core Standards may be provided . Former ELLS receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction for two years after testing out of the program.This instruction is differentiated for each individual group. Former ELL's who scored proficient on the NYSESLAT test or scored expanding on the NYSESLAT and a level 3 or 4 on the grade 3-5 NYS ELA exams are still given ELL support for two years. They still receive extended time on NYS exams for two years. ELL's use these accommodations for most assessments including those that are teacher made and state-mandated. Testing accommodations for ELL's include time extension on all exams, separate location, bilingual dictionaries or 2018-19 CEP 52  glossaries and native language edition or test. Translators when needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: ELL's and SWD's use visual picture dictionaries to help with language acquisition. The ENL teacher has a copy of the IEP and examines it to know strengths and weaknesses of the student. The classroom teacher confers with the ENL teacher to discuss the best mode of instruction for each student. The native language materials used are bilingual picture dictionaries and glossaries. The students use the Imagine Learning computer program for language acquisition skills. The Teachers College program is used for ELA instruction. There are specific strategies for ELL's and SWD built into the program. The instructional strategies used are differentiated instruction. This means that all students will not be doing the same activity in the same way all the time. This gives visual, verbal and tactile learners the opportunity to apply their strengths when learning. Total Physical Response is used. This is when teachers interact with students by delivering commands, and students demonstrate comprehension through physical response. Students are not expected to respond arally until they feel ready. This strategy involves little or no pressure to speak. Whole Language Approach is used. Linguistic, cognitive and early literacy skills are developed in an integrated fashion. Instructional Strategies for a Whole Language Approach include the four language skills of listenng, speaking, reading and writing. Visual displays are used in lessons and assignments to support the oral or written message. Flow charts, maps, graphs and pictures are used to demonstrate relationships between words and concepts. Venn diagrams, T-charts, story maps, time lines, demonstrations and captioning are used in the classroom. Labeling items in the classroom will assist ELL and Students with Disabilities (SWD's)in the identification of items and in relating the to written words. Music and charts are used in the classroom. These activities are motivating for students and asisits in reinforcing and revisiting content and concepts while acquiring English pronunciation and intonation patterns. Jazz charts are rhythmic expressions of standard English as it occurs in situations through the use of music or rap. Jazz chants improve intonation, vocabulary and grammar development. Cooperative Learning, Think/Pair/Share and Choral Reading give students the opportunity to think, discuss and write about topics related to what they have read. Teachers of ELL's and SWD use role playing. Students can demonstrate comprehension of a story by role play through retelling, visuals and props. The Leap Frog computer program is used by students for vocabulary and reading comprehension. The Imagine Learning English computer program is used for listening, reading, writing and speaking skills. Each child receives differentiated instruction. The program is designed to adapt to the individual needs of the student. The Smart boards in the classrooms are interactive and have visual aids for the ELL and SWD student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLS who are identified as having special needs are provided all accommodations according to their IEP. The IEP indicates specific test accommodations and promotional criteria for each individual student identified as having a disability. Some strategies used are one on one tutoring, counseling, SETTS and RTI and collaboration between teachers. Students are given grade level materials and have formal and informal assessments aligned with the NYS Common Core Learning 2018-19 CEP 53  Standards. Special Education teachers communicate with the ENL teacher to monitor the academic growth and languages acquisition of all ELL students with IEPs. When an ELL-SWD student is placed in an ICT class the psychological reports, the make up of the class, informal and formal assessments and the IEP are examined. This is done so the student can achieve English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. The school psychologist, ENL teacher, classroom team meet with the parent of the student to advise them about this decision. Interpreters are used if needed for the parent.The school uses flexible scheduling to help ELLs achieve language acquisition and their individual IEP goals.Each student has an individual action plan and is given extra help in their classrooms in individualized instruction or small group instruction.The plan is reviewed to see how much progress is made. If more help is needed it is incorporated into the schedule. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention services are offered in English. There is AIS Reading, Math and SETSS. The targeted intervention programs for ELL's in ELA and Great Leaps Literacy program, Math Basics Program, ELL Saturday Test Prep program, that encompasses technology by using the Imagine Learning English Instruction. These programs provide small group instruction. Lessons are targeted to the students weaknesses and strengths on the NYS tests as well as the NYSESLAT and ELL Interim Assessments. ARIS reports are analyzed to help each individual student. Modeling is provided during the lessons. Scaffolding is used in the lesson. These are targeted intervention programs in reading and math. The programs are offered in English. ELL students that are performing below level in reading and math are invited to extended day, Saturday test prep, and academic intervention services in the classroom during the day. The teachers and paraprofessionals work with the students in small groups in the classrooms. The targeted intervention for science, is having students work in small groups on hands-on science experiments, the targeted intervention for social studies, is working on group projects using maps, class trips and presenting assignments as a group with everyone taking apart. The ELL student has a buddy that he/she works with. ELL students use their visual picture dictionaries and glossaries. Notices about these programs go home to the parents in their preferred language. A RTI progress monitoring sheet is sent home to parents every 6 weeks to show where the student progressed and where they need help. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The new program that is being considered for the school year is the Imagine Learning English computer-based programs, and Great Leaps Program. The new program for the upcoming school year is the Saturday ELL Test Prep Program. This program will meet for four Saturdays to help the ELL students achieve academic success when they take the New York State exams. There will be a literacy as well as a math program. A new reading program called Teachers College is being used. IT has a comprehensive Core Literacy Curriculum. A new program called Investigations 3 Common Core Math program for grades 3-5 will be used. This is an Inquiry-based math program. It provides new digital tools,expanded family support and ongoing professional development.Students will investigate,collaborate and take part in problem-based learning.This program will help them explore mathematical ideas to develop fluency and understanding. Families will be involved with online access to games and resources.There will be family letters sent home with goals and suggestions.They will be sent home in the parents preferred language.Parent's will have access to online student reports. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? All of our services will remain the same for 2017-2019 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 CEP 54  The RTI program is open to all ELL students and the rest of the school population. All ELL students are held to the same high academic standards as our monolingual students. All ELL students participate in a 100 minute literacy block, which incorporates the components of a balanced literacy program including read- aloud, shared reading, word study, guided reading, independent reading, partner reading and writing workshop. All ELL's are invited to all after-school activities both academically and recreational. They are included in all of the programs (eg. Chorus, Saturday Test Prep, SEM Enrichment programs. ENL techniques will be utilized in shared reading, guided reading, read-aloud, modeled writing, vocabulary development and phonemic awareness. The Imagine Learning English program will be incorporated into the classroom. Students will have the opportunity to use computers to enhance their reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. The program automatically assesses student performance and adapts instruction to the individual student. Parents of ELL's have the opportunity to participate in the Imagine Learning English Staff development. They will be instructed on how to use the program and give sample activities that their children will be doing. They will be instructed on how to interpret the data that will be sent home. ELL students are invited to all programs available in the school, notification through letters are sent home n their native language. ELLs take part in all after school activities as well as all school activities (ex. G.O., class plays, class trips, extended day, violin residency, prom, senior trip). ELL students receive notices about school activities in their native language from the Parent Coordinator, Ms. Miller, classroom teachers and the ENL teacher, Ms. Lifshitz. The ELL student is represented in every school activity. The ELL students use the same reading and math program as all the students in the school. The programs are adapted to meet the ELL students needs. Last year we were involved with a grant from Inside Broadway. All ELL and SWD students put on a show as a culminating activity. They were involved in listening, reading, speaking and writing skills during the production. This was an ongoing activity for four months during the school year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Imagine Learning English program is a technology-based program geared to ELL students in all content areas. There are individualized assessments for the student work. The content area instructional materials used to support ELLs are NY History and Government-Houghton Mifflin, Science-Harcourt Series, Everyday Math Program, Fundations Treasures Program, Getting REady for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, Leap Frog Program, Oxford Picture Dictionaries, ESL-Scott Foresman textbook. ELL students use dictionaries in their native language to help them with vocabulary. These dictionaries are also available on the NYS tests. The ENL teacher has books in dual languages. Technology programs are Study Island, Imagine Learning English and Star fall. A science FOSS kit is in every classroom. Science is done on Fridays during super science Friday. This kit is a complete modular program consisting of 20 modules for elementary classrooms. All the materials needed are supplied for hands on science activities. Students work in groups to complete their investigations. The visual bilingual dictionary features a complete range of illustrated objects and scenes from everyday life. This helps the ELL student learn many objects that they see everyday. These dictionaries are used by the ELL student in their classroom to help with language acquisition. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students use glossaries, dictionaries and books in their native language. Group students of the same language for center activities so that they can assist each other and respond in their native language. This helps to make content comprehensible. Bilingual books are placed in the parent coordinators office for parent's to borrow. They are available in many languages ie., Creole, French, Arabic, Chinese, and Spanish. These books have an English translation in them as well as the parents native 2018-19 CEP 55  language. If a parent is not fluent in English, they can still read to their child at home. All notices to the parents are sent home in the parents preferred language. If an interpreter is needed for parent meetings or over the phone interpretation we use the office of translation and interpretation. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All books and technology programs are scaffolded to the ELL's needs. The books are selected with their grade level in mind. The student is assessed for their Fountas and Pinnell reading level. Once this level is determined appropriate materials of interest are given to the student to read. These are age and level appropriate. The speech providers and SETTS teacher also provide age appropriate services and materials to all students served. Resources like library books, technology programs and workbooks correspond to the ELL'S age and grade level. Texts are carefully selected to target student's vocabulary development. All curriculum support materials are age appropriate. These materials help the ELL become successful in our school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Imagine Learning English program is a technology-based program geared to ELL students in all content areas. There are individualized assessments for the student work. The content area instructional materials used to support ELLs are NY History and Government-Houghton Mifflin, Science-Harcourt Series, Everyday Math Program, Fundations Treasures Porgram, Getting REady for the NYSESLAT and Beyond, Leap Frog Program, Oxford Picture Dictionaries, ESL-Scott Foresman textbook. ELL students use dictionaries in their native language to help them with vocabulary. These dictionaries are also available on the NYS tests. The ESL teacher has books in dual languages. Technology programs are Study Island, Imagine Learning English and Starfall. A science FOSS kit is in every classroom. Science is done on Fridays during super science Friday. This kit is a complete modular program consisting of 20 modules for elementary classrooms. All the materials needed are supplied for hands on science activities. Students work in groups to complete their investigations. The visual bilingual dictionary features a complete range of illustrated objects and scenes from everyday life. This helps the ELL student learn many objects that they see everyday. These dictionaries are used by the ELL student in their classroom to help with language acquisition. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: Newly enrolled ELL’s have a tour of the school when they register. They meet the ENL teacher also. The guidance counselor, Ms. Hobson and the parent coordinator, Ms. Miller help the new parents and students adjust to the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: There are no language electives offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 56 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. All staff in the school is involved in professional development training. The ENL teacher, assistant principals, common branch teachers, paraprofessionals, ENL coordinator, guidance counselors, special ed teachers, psychologists, secretaries, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists secretaries and parent coordinators attend professional development training. Our professional development plans for 2016-2017 school years are designed to promote high levels of academic achievement. While integrating second language instruction. The 10 1/2 hours of ENL mandated professional development will also be fulfilled by all staff that service special education students. Topics for all staff members and paraprofessionals include: K-5 Curriculum Maps, ENL Strategies of Language Acquisition, Positive Classroom Environment for Mainstream and ELLs, Differentiating Instruction, ENL Strategies and Methodologies Within Writing Units, Imagine Learning English Program, Exploration of ELL websites, NYSESLAT training, Analyze Data Using Technology, Parental Involvement for Mainstream and ELLs. Records for the workshops will be maintained through attendance sheets. The professional development will take place Monday, October 23, 2017 - ENL strategies of language acquisition. Monday, November 6, 2017 - Positive classroom environment for mainstream and ELL's. Monday, November 27, 2017 - Strategies and methodologies within writing units. Monday, December 18, 2017 - Imagine Learning English program and exploration of ENL websites. Monday, March 5, 2018 - NYSESLAT training. 2. Professional Development is offered through our Field Support Center on a monthly basis. Staff Developers also come to our school to train teachers on developing lessons, for ELL using the Common Core Learning Standards. The professional development supports the teachers using the Teachers College program. It helps with the strategies being taught for our reading program. There were workshops on using the Common Core Learning Standards for writing for grades K-5. On Tuesday afternoons we have parent engagement time when the ENL teacher meets with the parents of the ELL students. Records of the meetings, phone calls or letters are kept with the interim Assistant Principal, Ms. Fiilipkowski. Translation services are available to the parents for every meeting. The ENL teacher meets with parents annually in addition to the PTC and orientation. This is to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress; their child's English language proficiency results and language development needs. This meeting is conducted with qualified interpreters/translators in the language mode of communication the parent understands best. Attendance is recorded for this meeting using an attendance sheet. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 57  1. All staff in the school is involved in professional development training. The ENL teacher, assistant principals, common branch teachers, paraprofessionals, ENL coordinator, guidance counselors, special ed teachers, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists secretaries and parent coordinators attend professional development training. Our professional development plans for 2016-2017 school years are designed to promote high levels of academic achievement. While integrating second language instruction. The 15 percent of ENL mandated professional development will also be fulfilled by all staff that service special education students. Topics for all staff members and paraprofessionals include: K-5 Curriculum Maps, ENL Strategies of Language Acquisition, Positive Classroom Environment for Mainstream and ELLs, Differentiating Instruction, ENL Strategies and Methodologies Within Writing Units, Imagine Learning English Program, Exploration of ELL websites, NYSESLAT training, Analyze Data Using Technology, Parental Involvement for Mainstream and ELLs. Records for the workshops will be maintained through attendance sheets. 2. Professional Development is offered through our Field Support Center on a monthly basis. Staff Developers also come to our school to train teachers on developing lessons, for ELL using the CCLS.This assures that the ENL teacher receives fifty percent of professional development hours in ELL- specific professional development. 3. What support do you provide staff to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle and/or middle to high school? Support is given to teachers to help the student transition to middle school. The ENL teacher provides information for different middle schools. The guidance counselor, Mrs. Hobson has a parent night to explain the application process to the parents for entering middle school. She has applications available for different middle schools. She has the application process explained in different languages. She is aware of the translation and interpretation unit if needed for the parents. speakers from different middle schools speak to the parents about different programs they have to offer. 4. Describe the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff (including non-ELL teachers) as per Jose P. All staff in school as stated above are given 7.5 hours of training during our Professional Development days. Training is geared to helping the ELLs in the classroom setting Agendas and attendance records are kept by the ENL teacher for each professional development. P.S. 208 ensures that 15% of our professional development as per CR part 154.2 is geared toward language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLS. Records are kept through an attendance sheet at all meetings an agenda at each meeting. fifty percent of the required professional development for bilingual and ENL teachers are dedicated to language acquisition aligned with the common content area instruction focusing on integrating language and content instruction for ELLS. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to our parent teacher conferences, the ENL teacher will meet with parents or guardians of English Language Learners at least one a year, to discuss their child's language progress, the goals of the ENL program, assessment results and language development needs in the content areas. This meeting will be conducted during parent engagement time on Tuesdays afternoons. The meeting will be conducted with a qualified translator/interpreter in the language the parent or guardian understands. Additional school staff will be present to inform the parent about the student's work in the content area. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 58  Paste response to questions 1-4 here 1. Describe parent involvement in your school, including parents of ELLs. Parents are involved in the school by attending a parent orientation, open school week, classroom visits and computer training. - Parents participate on various committees including: Parent Teacher Association and the School Leadership Team. - Parents are encouraged to participate in school activities ex-assemblies, field trips, learning walks and technology classes. - All parent correspondence, including letters, flyers and other communication are translated into a variety of languages spoken by our multilingual families. -Translators are available at meetings and in our main office. - All parents of ELL's are invited to participate in Curriculum Night in September 2017 to receive information about our school. topics discussed are school expectations, city/state standards and school classroom curriculum. All ELL's and their parents will be invited to Family Movie Nights throughout the school year. 2. Does the school partner with other agencies or Community Based Organizations to provide workshops or services to ELL parents? Parents are invited to attend parent workshops geared to the ELL students. They are invited to after school workshops to learn computer based technology that their children are learning. The team from Imagine Learning English helps present these workshops. P.S. 208 partners with Community Based Organizations to provide services and workshops to ELL parents. The organizations we are involved in are: Haitian Center Services, New Hope Guild, Urban Resources Institute, Caribbean Community Mental Health Program, Crown Heights, Community Mental Health Program, Jewish Board of Family and Children. ELL parents are given opportunities to attend workshops and reach out for services needed. 3. How do you evaluate the needs of the parents? A survey is taken to see what other workshops the parents are interested in. We evaluate the needs of the parents through conferences with the parent coordinator, ENL teachers, assistant principal, principal, staff members and a Parent Teacher Association. 4. How do your parental involvement activities address the needs of the parents? The workshops are geared to the suggestions the parents make.There are meetings with the parent coordinator through out the year to discuss their needs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nakoley Renville, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 208K School DBN: 18K208 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Mrs. Nakoley Renville Principal Mrs. Natalie Filipkowski Assistant Principal Mrs .Carla Hudlin-Miller Parent Coordinator Mrs.Alisa Lifshitz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Amika Tallerson Parent Miss Lauren Stevenson STEM Sci Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Marie Francis SETTS Teacher/Subject Area Mrs. Queen Asemota Coach Coach Mrs. Lisa Hobson School Counselor Mrs. Beverly Wilkins Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette Fougere Mrs. Castro Library Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K208 School Name: Elsa Ebeling Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Alisa Lifshitz ENL teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration parents fill out the Home Language survey in their native language. On part III of the survey parents are asked in which language they prefer to communicate with the school. They are also asked, which language is primarily used in the home. If another language other than English is spoken a list is created. This list will be used when forms are sent home and when there is over the phone and in person communication with the parents. All parent surveys are translated into other languages. Critical information regarding a child's education are translated. These documents are about conduct and discipline, standards and performance, special education and related services registration, application and selection, safety and health issues, transfer and discharge and legal and disciplinary matters. Documents in the parents preferred language are also sent home about parent meeting, shows, and after school services. On the student emergency card it is indicated whether a parent speaks another language and needs an interpreter. If the parent does need an interpreter we use an in house interpreter to speak to the parent.If an in house interpreter is not available, the translation and interpretation unit is called. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali French Haitian Creole Jamaican-creole English Oneida Spanish 8 2 1 18 1 436 1 1 1.71 0.43 0.21 3.85 0.21 93.16 0.21 0.21 9 2 1 19 0 435 1 1 1.92 0.43 0.21 4.0 0 92.95 0.21 0.21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? New York State Testing Calendar September Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents will be translated by the translation and interpretation unit and sent home to parents in languages requested. ENL Citywide Parent meetings September-June Documents are sent to school in different languages and given out by the ENL teacher and parent coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 63  ENL Parent Orientations September-June Parent Teacher Conferences November,March and May Given to parents in their native language .Translated notices available online. Translation and Interpretation Unit.or Parent Coordinator will use Google translator to send text message. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences November,March and May Curriculum Night October Parent Engagement Workshops September-June Family Engagement Activities September-June interpretation service(s)? We use over the phone translation and interpretation services and bilingual school personnel.If needed the DOE Vendor The Big Word. We use bilingual school staff or the translation and interpretation unit over the phone service. Translation and Interpretation Unit when requested or bilingual school personnel Over the phone translation and interpretation or bilingual school staff. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency the office staff or parent coordinator will call LEP parents using in house bilingual personnel.The parent coordinator will also text message them in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The parent coordinator Mrs.Miller, will have training from the translation and interpretation unit. She will have a meeting to present the services available to limited-English proficient parents.The Language access coordinator will meet with all staff at grade meetings to discuss all resources available to limited-English proficient families. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill parental notification requirements a multilingual welcome poster is displayed at the front entrance of P.S. 208K. This poster will remind parents that P.S. 208K can assist them in their native language. The name and telephone number of the person for parents to contact for translations is displayed. A calendar with the Translation and Interpretation units contact information is posted at the front security desk. There is also a translation and interpretation and informational brochure for parents to look at. A Language Identification Guide and info card on interpretation services is copied and distributed to P.S. 208K staff. This will help all staff in the school identify the language of a limited English proficient parent. The Language Identification Guide has over 30 languages that some parents might communicate in. The info card has 9 languages displayed on it. These are the nine most common languages spoken by families of DOE students. These resources will help better engage limited English proficient parents.Parent letters and ,brochures are distributed to the parents in their preferred language as indicated on the home language form filled out at the time of registration. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? There will be a school survey distributed to parents to assess whether we are communicating with parents in their native preferred language. Mrs. Renville, the school Principal will fill out the Principal Satisfaction Survey to assess the central supports that are provided to the school. This will include the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit and other language service providers used. When the Translation and Interpretation Unit is used the parents will fill out a Translation and Interpretation Satisfaction Survey to assess the language services provided. 2018-19 CEP 65 
