2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K213 School Name: P.S. 213 NEW LOTS Principal: STANLEY MOISE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 19K213 The New Lots School 331900010213 PreK-5 580 Hegeman Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11207 718-257-4034 Phone Number: 718-272-3446 Fax: Stanley Moise Smoise2@schools/.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Stanley Moise Nick Mangone N/A TBA N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Dr. Thomas McBryde, Jr. Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue TMcBryde@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2700 Phone Number: 718-240-2741 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov ) Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3352 Phone Number: 718-935-2337 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stanley Moise Eric Wilkinson Crystal Betts Francine Parker N/A N/A N/A LeondraWorley Rhonda Barker ShantaeWilliams *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/DC 37 Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Sabrina Brathwaite RainfordPaulette MyriamPaul Michelle Sylvester Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement states, “The New Lots School/Public School 213 strives to establish a positive learning environment, which facilitates the motivation of our diverse learners to achieve high academic standards. We believe that all children can learn and have the right to a quality education in a safe and secure school. We have high academic/social standards that foster a productive learning environment, which encourages literacy, mathematics, science, social studies, technology, and the arts. To achieve such a positive learning environment, the school will provide programs that contribute to the emotional, social and physical well-being of every student; provide staff with the necessary support to internalize and promote the school’s vision, goals and objectives; invite parents and 2018-19 CEP 9  community resources into school while collaboratively planning to prepare our students to compete and excel in society, the nation and the world." 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The New Lots School is an elementary school located in the heart of East New York community, with 337students from grade pre-kindergarten to grade five. The school population comprises 80% Black, 15% Hispanic, 3% White, 1% American Indian/Alaskan Native, and 1% Asian students. The student body includes 19% English language learners and 22% special education students. Boys account for 51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 49%. The average attendance rate for the current school year 2017 - 2018 is 86.1% 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have now a growing population of Middle Easterners in our school community. The needs of our newest comers must be addressed with careful attention to specific needs and precision to ensure success for all students. We will continue to strive to support our learners to reach their fullest potential. We set high expectations for achievement, personal conduct and we encourage all to become life-long learners. Our Responsive Classroom program will grow to allow teachers, administrators, school aides and guidance counselor to get to know students on an individual basis. A challenge at PS 213 that we face is improving in the elements of Trust and rigorous instruction from the lenses of Framework for Great Schools. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made strong gains in the areas of 1. Strong Family-Community Ties- we truly believe in supporting our families with targeted support and meeting their needs as they may be. We conducted several workshops and training sessions to support our families and community members. 2. Effective School Leadership- our school leaders employ resources available to further the growth of all teachers and provided opportunities for individual staff to excel in their practices. We held more than usual data meetings with our teachers to encourage the use of student data and pedagogical strategies with our learners 3. We are continuing to fortify our school learning environment by moving forward with our PBIS initiative, responsive Classroom and Breakfast in the classroom. These program help us to ensure that we support our learners in the school building and to enrich our academics and social and emotional needs of our learners. We partnered with several mental health providers to assist with student management and student needs. We will continue to work on Rigorous instruction and Trust as they are areas that merit careful attention to our shared goals and to intellectually challenge all our learners to develop the needed skills to achieve and to go beyond college and career readiness. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K213 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 285 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 43 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 22 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 93.0% % Reduced Lunch 9.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 20.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.42 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 14.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 68% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 86.1% 1.1% 16.5% 69.5% 1.8% 2.1% 4 0% 12.5 16.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths ● Over the summer weeks, several of our teachers will gather to make the necessary adjustments to Rubicon our research-based curriculum system to adjust, modify and revise our curriculum. We will continue to work with Teacher's College consultants and coaches to modify and revise the Reading and Writing curriculum to meet our needs and targeted goals. ● Our curriculum team members ensure that the ELA and Mathematics instructional shifts align with our curriculum to emphasize on critical thinking skills, higher order thinking activities and alignment to the CCLS. We will incorporate EngageNY materials to support our needs and to support our learners. ● Teachers develop curriculum maps and units of study and meet weekly to design lessons aligned to CCLS. ● Teachers create authentic assessments to gauge student assimilation of the content and to create plans to address targeted needs of our learners. ● Teachers create common assessments in all core content areas and administer pre-assessments before units of study begin and post assessments at the end of units. They utilize multiple assessments across grades to measure student performance and to inform instruction at the class and student level. ● Teachers will meet and collaborate to look at student artifacts and refine unit lessons and tasks based on the Instructional data that we will examine in September.. Needs 2018-19 CEP 12  Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review 1.2, in order for our school to move to an Effective rating, we must consistent supports during instruction to assist all learners in engaging in challenging tasks. In some classrooms student effort does not reflect high levels of student ownership and discussion reinforce our set of beliefs about how student learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and the CCLS. As a school community, we must meet out students at their entry points and construct routes for them to reach their learning potential and school instructional expectations. We must revise our curriculum to ensure that it meets the specific learning needs of our students and to focus on their learning outcomes. This is critical in order to strengthen the alignment between our curriculum and assessments and to allow teachers to provide targeted regular and explicit data - based feedback to address students’ next steps. Although our teachers create rubrics and regularly refine lesson plans and students across the school engage in cognitively challenging tasks, we must strengthen pedagogical practices and ensure that all teachers have a system in place to facilitate student ownership of learning. Professional development sessions will focus on strategies that meet the needs of all learners, including SWD’s and ELLs, and reflect high levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership to improve student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019-- There will be a 35% growth in Math scores and in ELA proficiency (Levels 3 and 4), across grade levels, as evidenced by the NYS ELA an dExam. 100% of teachers will participate in the TCRWP program to establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, school community and families and to implement with fidelity our ELA curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Based on research by Bambrick-Santoyo (2012) “Leverage Leadership; “great professional development starts with knowledge about what teachers need.” ● We will ensure that teachers are provided with professional learning that is needed on a monthly basis to meet with the Data Specialist and Assistant Principals to analyze students’ data and develop plans with differentiated student supports to ensure improved student outcomes. ● Teacher Teams will meet regularly to follow the data process and share strategies leading to increased student outcomes. Classroom, cluster and IEP/SESIS Teachers, All Students Ongoing from September 2018- June 2019 Instructional cabinet members, Grade leaders and BFS support staff, Teacher College support staff/consultants ● In order to support all subgroups, teachers will implement a school wide data system so that CCLS lesson assessments are aligned to the curriculum and adapted to meet the needs of diverse learners in each classroom. Classroom, cluster and IEP/SESIS Teachers Ongoing from September 2018- June 2019 Instructional cabinet members, Grade leaders and BFS support staff and Teachers' College coaches ● Staff follows our comprehensive school-wide assessment calendar and continues to be trained in understanding data, and creating learning targets and goals. ● Teachers use pre and post formative summative assessments across grades and content areas so that alignment between curriculum and assessments is ensured. ● All parents/ caregivers are given opportunities to participate in curriculum workshops that aid in understanding CCLS and the Instructional Shifts in ELA and MATH) and how they can help their child at home with activities related to CCLS. ● Teachers will participate in class Inter-visitation to share examples of curriculum design and implementation, to learn classroom management techniques, to understand and see how students respond to different types of instructional strategies and reflect on professional practice. All guardians/ Parent/Caregivers, All Teachers Ongoing from September 2018- June 2019 Instructional cabinet members, Grade leaders and BFS support staff and Teachers' College coaches 2018-19 CEP 14 ● Teachers and administration will work together to foster collaboration and trust by planning and creating individual teacher goals which support progress towards the school wide instructional focus. ● Teachers will create inclusive instruction opportunities for students by including their students in the lessons. Include student names when creating examples within the lesson, and by encouraging all students to take academic risk, consistently reassuring students as they go to develop trust. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At least three Parent workshops will be held by administration, teachers, and staff throughout the year to help parents understand rigorous instruction and The Common Core in order to support their children at home. Teachers will also be encouraged to meet individually with parents to reflect and discuss practices that can be used at home to meet the individual needs of their child. Strategies to increase parent involvement include: • Parent coordinator will conduct bi-monthly parent workshops. • Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:20 pm -3:00 pm • Parent trainings on subject/content related matters • Student-Led Parent Teacher Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources : • Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Parent coordinator, SETSS teachers, ELL teachers, Guidance counselor, related services providers • Teacher's College Reading Writing Project, Envisions Math, Amplify Science, Passport to Social Studies, Fundations (Phonics) • TCRWP Unit assessments, Benchmark assessments, i-Ready assessments • Technological support, including Smartboard programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 15  X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● December 2018: Completion of CCLS aligned units of study (Lower Grade) TCRWP program, Completion of 6 units of study (Lower Grade) Envision math program. ● November 2018: Completion of 1 CCLS aligned unit of study (Upper Grade) TCRWP program , Completion of 6 units of study (Upper Grade) Envision math program. ● December 2018: Mid-year meeting with teachers to evaluate our system and to make changes where necessary to meet our goals. ● January 2019: Progress monitoring of second round of Fountas & Pinnell Reading Levels, Grades K-5. ● April 2019: 75% Completion of Advance observations that reflect implementation of professional development strategies Informal Observations (Advance) ● May 2019: Progress review with all teachers to review school data, student data and progress level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use benchmarks to monitor student growth. Implement BOY, MOY and EOY benchmarks to track student progress. Based on the PPO conducted in March 13, 2018, the school will ensure that benchmark check-ins and information/data demonstrates the progress towards the goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the March 13, 2018 PPO report, staff will be required to create and implement a 4-6 week cycle of professional development with a focus on scaffolding higher order questioning and rigorous tasks. All staff will continue to help students become more resilient so they can persevere through challenges. We will continue to address school needs by: • Conducting parent-teacher, student-led conferences in grades 3-5, bi-annually, during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed and future goals will be set by the student • Providing translation services for parents based on home language survey results • Hosting annual celebrations such as Multicultural Day which allows both students and parents to share their cultures with the school community • Reaching out to parents who are unable to attend the conferences at school through Class Dojo, email, and/or phone conferences • Providing incentives to students and parents who attend Student-Led Conferences • Establish a variety of self assessment tools for students to use to aid in self reflection • Continue to develop protocols for student led conferences Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will achieve a 80% reduction of infraction ranging from level 3 through 5 and by developing an environment where our students have access to a variety of learning and social emotional resources. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● The school will implement the positive behavior research-based program, Responsive Classroom (RC), to improve school safety, school climate and academic performance. Responsive Classroom has been recognized by the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning (CASEL) as one of the well-designed, evidence based social and emotional learning programs. In a study conducted by Dr. Sara Rimm-Kaufman in 2008-2011, it was found that RC improved student achievement, teacher-student interactions and higher quality instructions in mathematics. All Stakeholders: Teachers, paras, service providers, school aides and students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, guidance counselor, teachers, paras, Parent Coordinator, PTA and service providers ● ELL providers will push-in during initial morning meetings to ensure ELL students comprehend and participate in the routines of both RC and PBIS programs. ELL and SWD Students, school aides and parents September 2018 – June 2019 ELL teacher, PTA, and parent coordinator, parents Parents/Caregivers Parent, teachers staff, ELL provider and parent September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, guidance counselor, teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator, PTA and service providers ● Workshops will be provided for ELL and SWD parents to ensure all stakeholders understand the routines and school wide culture being implemented. Parents /caregivers will be provided with RC and PBIS literature explaining the positive behavior elements ● related to both programs. ● Provide training to parents groups and caregivers in both RC and PBIS practicing. ● Parents will be invited to various assemblies showcasing positive academic, social and emotional student behavior. Parents will receive celebratory certificates of students identified as Student of the Month and most improved in academic and social and emotional standings ● Teachers and parents will engage in weekly outreach sessions to communicate about academic and behavioral concerns and offer reciprocal behavioral suggestions to improve disciplinary routines. 2018-19 CEP 18 ● Staff and parents will maintain open lines of communications concerning school safety and efforts to create safe and supportive learning environments. ELL service provider will integrate RC and PBIS strategies at the onset of every pull out sessions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: • Parent coordinator conducts monthly parent workshops. • Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:20-3:00 • PTA meetings • Title I Parent meeting • The PS 213 website to foster communication between the teacher and the home • Inviting parents to participate in interactive, hands-on workshops that allow both parents and students to take part in the learning experience and allow students to explain the academic purpose of the activity to their parents. • Conducting student-led conferences in grades K-5, at least once a year, during which the individual student’s achievement will be discussed and future goals will be set by the student. • Continuing to uphold an open-door policy with parents from all backgrounds and nationalities by providing translation services for all languages spoken in our school. • Hosting annual celebrations, such as Multicultural Day which allows both students and parents to share their cultures with the school community. • Reaching out to parents who cannot attend the conferences via Class Dojo, email, and/or phone conferences • Providing initiatives to students and parents who attend Student-Led Conferences with their parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Funding for vendor to provide professional development for all stakeholders (staff and parents) to increase positive behavior and social emotional learning of students through instruction, student involvement, and interventions. ● Per Diem funds for all staff to receive sustainable professional development in order to enhance positive behavioral practices by adults. 2018-19 CEP 19  ● Funding for materials (teacher books, activity books, classroom chimes, etc.). Provide professional development opportunities to parents to learn the code of conduct to support student behavior. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● November 2018: School-wide review of Online Occurrence Reporting System review whereby school leaders will analyze hourly incidents analysis reports and occurrence summary and snapshot. ● February 2019: Conduct mid-year discussion with teachers to review and modify safety data and to dissect student and class specific issues ● Staff will engage in mid- year (February and March 2019 and end of year (June 2019) professional development refreshers on positive behavioral programs to reflect on programs’ implementation of best practices. ● By April 2019: school leaders will complete the monitoring process of VADIR and WEIP to share results with school staff on matters related to safety, infractions and school incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The collaboration of administration and staff to produce a professional development plan to support school climate, classroom leaning environment and student management. • PD agendas • Teacher feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A data-driven approach is used to improve student performance using multiple measures to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth on a continuous basis. After reviewing and analyzing NYS assessment results, NYC and school benchmark tests, teacher-made/grade level tests, student portfolios, classroom performance: ● Teachers develop curriculum maps and unit of study aligned to CCLS. ● Teachers develop lesson plans that are appropriately aligned to CCLS in all content areas and reflective of the CCLS Shifts to inform their instructional practices ● Teachers utilize rubrics and regularly refine lesson plans after analyzing results from common assessments that lead to coherent adjustments to instruction. Through teacher collaboration, we ensure all teachers develop lesson plans that are rigorous, allowing for multiple entry points and ask questions that challenge students to think critically. Observational evidence shows that unit and lesson plans are refined, and tasks revised, based on the analysis of student work to promote higher-order questioning and cognitive engagement in order to prepare students to achieve their full potential. However, in many classes, questioning is teacher-dominated and, for the most part, volleyed between the student and teacher, sometimes with insufficient wait time for students to formulate their own responses. Based on the Principal's PPO an area of focus is: Continue to think about how teachers can assure that students are consistently engaged in a rigorous activity especially when they finish their work early or to ensure that transitions from one activity to another are smoother and faster so that students are continually engaged. (1.2) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 21  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of our students will move up at least 3 reading levels, as measured by our end of year running records, in comparisons with the September 2018 baseline. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our systems and structures for teacher collaboration and leadership are based on research by Bambrick-Santoyo (2012) “Leverage Leadership” which focuses on effective, collaborative professional development leading to improvements in student learning. Classroom, cluster and IEP/SESIS Teachers, Educational assistants On- going September 2018 – June 2019 Borough Field Support- Literacy and math Specialists; Coach and Administrative Team ● Our teachers will participate on a weekly basis in collaborative professional development with Assistant Principals and our Math Coach. We will ensure that teachers deepen their understanding of effective questioning and how to effectively differentiate instruction via entry points, through weekly differentiated professional learning. ● Teachers will collaboratively plan and share strategies and higher order questions that engage all students in rigorous tasks, and develop differentiated student supports to ensure improved student outcomes. Teacher teams will meet regularly to develop rigorous lesson plans and focus strategies leading to improved student outcomes . ● Teachers will write unit and lesson plans that differentiate instruction for all learners - including SWDs and ELLs, to provide entry points that will engage all learners in higher order thinking skills. ● Teachers will use formative assessments to evaluate whether all students benefit from targeted tiered learning activities. ● Selected teachers will provide targeted support to selected at-risk students in an afterschool program. All Students and sub groups, All Teachers, Educational Assistants On- going September 2018 – June 2019 Administrative Team , Parent Coordinator and Data Specialist ● Parent Learning Leaders receive training on CCLS and the Instructional Shifts in ELA and MATH and meet with our Parents/Caregivers and Teachers On- going September 2018– June 2019 Administrative Team , Parent Coordinator and Data Specialist 2018-19 CEP 23  Parent Coordinator on a monthly basis to provide support to our school community. ● All parents/ caregivers are given opportunities to participate in trainings that aid in understanding CCLS and the Instructional Shifts in ELA and MATH) and how standards/shifts affect their child’s learning. ● On a weekly basis (each Tuesday), parent/caregiver outreach occurs providing them with feedback of student academic progress in higher order thinking and discussion. Parents receive monthly school and grade-wide newsletters; which highlight celebrations, materials used and strategies implemented within units of study being taught. ● Teachers and Educational Assistants will continue to look at student work to build on individual student needs and collaborate with students - via conferencing and provide timely actionable feedback/ next steps. Students, All Teachers Educational Assistants, Parents On- going September 2018 – June 2019 Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, Borough Field Support personnel MOTP observations October -2018-June 2019 ● Supervisors will conduct informal and formal observations to ensure that the curriculum is being implemented and provide teachers with actionable feedback aligned to questioning and discussion practices for continuous improvement as per the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) component of teacher evaluation and development system. ● Building on the work of teacher teams through the use of the Looking at Student Work (LSW) protocol as well as the utilization of the End of Unit Reflection Template our teachers will collaborate, build trust and reflections on professional practice. Communication between staff and families is enhanced and mutual respect/ trust is built through parent meetings, open school conferences, monthly newsletter, PTA meeting, parent workshops and weekly parent engagement communications . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: • Parent coordinator conducts quarterly parent workshops. 2018-19 CEP 24  • Parent outreach on Tuesdays from 2:20-3:00 •Monthly SLT meetings • PTA meetings • Title I Parent meeting • The PS 213 website to foster communication between the teacher and the home • Teachers will reach out to parents of ESL, SWD and at-risk students to inform them of their child’s progress and work together to promote academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per diem rate coverage for teachers to collaboratively curriculum map utilizing Rubicon Atlas including the entering of rigorous questions and task ● Per diem rate coverage for Instructional Team teachers study group around questioning and discussion strategies ● Funding for materials (study groups book). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● In December 2018 and February 2019: Teacher observation ratings and data as per the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) component 3b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques - after all teachers have received second Advance rating, review data in relationship to component 3b. Target goal is 70% of teachers in March 2019 will have demonstrated Effective practices in questioning and discussion. ● March 2019: Administrative review of curriculum and unit plans will checks for a minimum of 3 higher order thinking questions in each lesson or unit plan. ● Teachers will evaluate student work monthly to ensure that students demonstrate progressive growth in achieving lesson/unit objectives. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Use of data information from Advance system to monitor teacher improvement and to address challenges. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The current survey report indicates that there is a need to continue to lead change at the community level, nurture the leadership capacity of others in the school building and to provide guidance to sustain a coherent instructional program. • The principal will continue to lead PD and have beginning of year, middle of year and end of year goal setting meetings with teachers to ensure they are meeting their professional goals as well as the goals of their students. • School leaders will articulate expectations in post-observation conferences and in written observations. • School leaders and faculty regularly ensure the achievement of learning goals by tracking progress at the school, teacher team, and classroom level . • High quality professional development in Literacy and data retrieval is provided for teachers. •The school aligns professional development with student performance data, the needs of the staff, and regional initiatives. • We have established teams on every grade level where staff members, after analyzing student work, provide instruction to students in small groups. • Teams help to develop teacher capacity and collaboration. They empower the teachers to make decisions about how best to instruct their students. It enables them to organize around the learning of a select group of students for whom they then share responsibility. It focuses teachers on aligning assessment, curriculum, instruction and professional development to generate school-wide improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of our teachers will increase at least one level on Danielson component 3B and C by the end-of-year 2018-2019 school year. As a result, our students will be more engaged and further challenged in class. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our leadership structures are based on the data process research of Nancy Love’s book (2008), “Using Data to Improve Learning.” Love discusses using data to improve learning for all students by tracking progress and goals. All Teachers On- going September 2018- June 2019 Administrative Team, All Teachers and Data Specialist ● Teachers will analyze a wide range of formative, periodic, and summative assessments, as well as student work products, to identify trends, strengths and areas of need across classes, school-wide and individually. ● Teachers will deepen the school’s capacity in use of data that informs progress of targeted subgroups. Teachers will strengthen support for the teacher teams in protocols and progress monitoring and create a professional development plan that supports the school’s instructional focus ● Administration in conjunction with our Data Specialist and all teachers, including SETTS and ESL teachers, will disaggregate and analyze student data consistently via monthly “data conversations” in order to adapt curriculum units and lessons according to the student’s needs. All Teachers Monthly September 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, All Teachers and Data Specialist ● Teachers will engage in corrective action planning for targeted students. All teachers, including SETTS and ESL teachers will share timely feedback and engage in collaborative conversations with parents/caregivers regarding the needs and progress of students. All Teacher, Parents / Caregivers ● Administrative Team in conjunction with Professional Learning Committee engages in collaborative conversations and planning of professional learning based on staff needs. All Teacher All Parents / Caregivers ● All parents/caregivers including SLT and PTA member are given opportunities to participate in workshop which: - Identify school wide instructional targets. and All Teachers and Administrative Team All Teachers and Administrative Team On- going September 2018–June 2019 On- going September 2018–June 2019 2018-19 CEP 27 - Midyear town hall meetings address progress towards our goals All Teachers engage in data conversation with students via conferring to guide next steps 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops and trainings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per diem /per session rate coverage for teachers to have an opportunity to participate in the implementation of the goal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, teachers, administration, and TC data specialist will participate in “Data Conversations” and provide support, feedback, and professional development, as needed. All staff will engage in professional development that will focus on Danielson's Framework Components 3b, 3c, and 3d to acquire strategies and improve classroom instructional practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. • By June 2019, all collaborative teacher teams will participate in professional learning opportunities to improve student engagement to increase effective and highly effective teachers in domains 3C and 3D in the Advance data system. • Daily checkpoints will indicate class progress toward meeting goals within Envision math . • On-going progress will be monitored by administrators through observations, looking at student work, lesson plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to move our HEDI rating to Highly Effective, we must continue to strategically use and communicate formative, periodic, and summative data and ensure that our families know their children’s academic needs and are supported in helping them succeed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% growth improvement in the communication to our school community and family partners to illustrate Strong Family and Community Ties and to demonstrate our commitment to community relationships. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? According to Research conducted by Dr. Karen Mapp (2007), “successfully connecting schools, families and communities help to improve student learning and is effectively used to build relationships/partnerships.” ● To improve and increase school, family and community relationships, workshops will be offered in: October 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, PTA, and SLT All stakeholder: Parents, students, staff and community We will encourage non-profit community groups to use our school facility, which is not only a good use of resources but, also provides opportunities to strengthen school – community relationships. ● Parents of ELL students and students with disabilities will be supported with a series of workshops that address the needs of ELL and SWD students, and teach parents how to become effectively involved in their students’ education. ESL teacher and SN teachers will conduct learning sessions with parents about student data and to aid instruction and setting teacher/student goals to meet the linguistic, learning goals, cultural and educational needs of all students with disabilities and ELL students. ● Honor Roll Dinner: Parents are invited to celebrate students who made significant achievement and progress during the school year with the entire school community. ● Career Day is a valuable educational experience where parents and local business people share their expertise with our classes. ● Monthly school newsletters provide parents/ caregivers information about curriculum, academics and important events in the school. ● Continue to promote parent and community participation and attendance at school wide cultural events. ● Foster community relationships by providing parents and students with FDNY Fire Safety Workshops. Parents and Students October 2018 – June 2019 Administration, ESL Teacher, IEP/SETTS Teacher September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator All stakeholders: Parents, students, staff and community All stakeholders: Parents, students, staff and community October 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, PTA and SLT 2018-19 CEP 30 ● Build continued trust students, parents, teachers and administration by providing monthly assemblies which celebrate “student of the month” and “most improve student.” 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Funding for professional development of staff and parents; Instructional program for parents ● Funding for materials (Costumes, stage props, refreshments) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● All subject areas will administer mid-term assessments to monitor student learning and program effectiveness, by December, February and April 2019 ● Mid-year baseline assessments, by January 2019 ● MOSL, at least twice in the school year 2019 ● Assessments will be conducted by January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Documentation of sign-in sheets for all meetings held with parents - Copies of referenced materials - Staff will submit monthly summaries of parent interactions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Waterford Small Group ● Scantron One-to-One When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the School Day After School program ● TCRWP Peer Tutoring ● MyOn Tier I – small group in the classroom Tier II- targeted small group in the classroom Tier III- targeted small group or one to one tutoring by a teacher Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Our ELA AIS program will focus on improving our struggling readers and low performers. It provides our students with various strategies to deal with reading complex text passages including applying prior knowledge, close reading, identifying the main idea, recalling details, drawing conclusions, making text connections, identifying sequences, recognizing cause and effect and distinguishing fact from fiction, readers’ purpose. Our learners are exposed to test taking strategies that address their specific needs and target areas of weaknesses. There is a strong concentration on reading and writing skills and a number of test-taking strategies that will help to equip our 2018-19 CEP 32 ● Math games Small Group ● Math Fact Challenges One-to-One Peer Tutoring ● During the school day ● In our after-school program . ● Math online sites ● Online instructional videos ● Extensive hands-on use of manipulatives Tier I – small group in the classroom Tier II- targeted small group in the classroom the classroom teacher Tier III- targeted small group or one to one tutoring by a teacher Mathematics learners to become H.S and college ready. Our main focus this school year is to improve student performance and to ensure that our challenging learners become proficient and successful in mathematics. Our learners will be exposed to more opportunities to participate and engage in the learning process, to collaboratively examine the big pictures in mathematics, to identify student strengths and weaknesses. Our AIS program is geared to focus on specific areas where our learners require remediation and to better able our learners to meet proficiency and in-depth knowledge of mathematical concepts and skills. Through our AIS program, we will continue to address and target all of the mathematical strands, not limited to Number Sense and Operations and Algebraic Thinking, Measurement, Statistics and Geometry. We continue with the infusion of effective test sophistication strategies, teacher 2018-19 CEP 33 Extensive hands-on use with science consultant. Integrating Nonfiction text through literacy Small Group During the School Day One-to-One Peer Tutoring Science created diagnostics, Chapter and Unit exams, Beginning and End of year assessments that allow our learners to develop on areas of their weaknesses. Our approach is to re-familiarize our learners with Life, Physical and Earth science skills and concepts. Teachers utilized various strategies to expose our learners with the necessary scientific skills to develop greater understanding of Hypothesis, data analysis, presentation, research and lab experiment. We will explore various teaching opportunities to better prepare our learners to experiment with real life samples, plants and hands-on activities. We seek to impact the ways our learners make sense of science, learning outcomes and make real like connections. We conduct on-going assessments, pre-post diagnostics that identify leaning needs of our learners. We identify strengths and weaknesses of our learners to provide individual instruction and interventions 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Our program will identify areas in U.S. History and humanities that need our immediate of concern to provide require remediation. We use past exams, teacher created assessments and maps/graphs to address student shortcoming and to alleviate weakest areas. We implement assessments to gauge student progress and to provide intervention services. We target students by providing non-fiction text, complex reading strategies, using critical thinking skills and important historical facts We identified at-risk students with learning and emotional needs to support them with self-awareness, respect for self and others. Additionally, we provide mediation, counseling and personal skills to support their growth and emotional development. Integrating Nonfiction text through literacy Small Group During the School Day One-to-One Peer Tutoring ● Speech Small Group During the School Day ● Occupational Therapist One-to-One ● Guidance Counselor ● Social Worker ● School Psychologist/Physical Therapist 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We want to provide our learners with resources to support with when it is cold, clothing and other health materials to aid them. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36 hygiene materials and cold weather goods 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrators and staff participate in weekly ongoing professional development. The professional development is designed to support our staff with our areas of greatest need. We have participated in professional development offered by the city, and network consultants. We have devoted sessions this year toward CCLS and instructional shifts to further implement the CCLS and designing units of study in both ELA and Math. In-house professional development is also offered by various staff members in areas where they demonstrate effectiveness. To better support our goals we foster the following: ● Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives ● Integrate professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ESL staff into the ongoing instructional activities of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support Involve parents in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and increased engagement in the school's education program 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We at PS 213 engage in weekly professional development to support the development of our pedagogues. The professional development is designed to support our staff with our areas of greatest need. We have participated in professional development offered by the city, and network consultants. We have devoted sessions this year toward CCLS and instructional shifts to further implement the CCLS and designing units of study in both ELA and Math. In-house professional development is also offered by various staff members in areas where they demonstrate effectiveness. To better support our goals we foster the following: ● Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives 2018-19 CEP 38  ● Integrate professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ESL staff into the ongoing instructional activities of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support ● Create classes whereby students and parents participate in learning about our curriculum and the CCLS standards. This process involve our parents in their children's education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff, and increased engagement in the school's education program Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Students are expected to know all of their letters and sounds by the end of Pre-Kindergarten. Teachers expose their students to pre-literacy skills, mathematical concept, social studies and science units of study. Such rigorous instruction ensures our students are prepared for the elementary school program. For instance, pre-kindergarten teachers participate in professional development around the CCLS. They also attend differentiated professional development for their students. Our Pre-K teachers also provide small group instruction for our early childhood students. This keeps them abreast of what their children should be prepared to do when they leave pre-k. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In order to decide upon the Measures of Teacher Practice Local and State assessments, the principal, school administrators and a handful of teachers were selected to collaborate (Members of MOSL committee) to inform the principal on the local measures that teachers would be evaluated on. This team meets regularly to collaborate and to advise the principal and the larger teacher community. A professional learning committee was created to support the professional growth of teachers and to plan for professional development for the whole school. The team comprises 2018-19 CEP 39  of teachers from various grades, school leaders, teacher assistant and a coach to support with the vital decision making process of the school. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 CEP 40   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The New Lots Schools, P.S. 213, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The New Lots Schools, P.S. 213 will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The New Lots Schools, P.S. 213, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 44  s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The number of ELLs in our school is increasing and we have new comers in all grades from K through 5th grade.We have around 30 ELLs this year besides proficient ones.They have come from different backgrounds specially Spanish and Arabic speaking.The students are mostly performing at Entering and Emerging levels, based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT tests. They are in a dire need of a supplemental direct instruction program to move them up and help them keep up with their peers and succeed academically.That's why we need this program badly.A classroom content area teacher is going to help the ENL teacher in the program. That's to say there will be two teachers participating in the program. There will be two subgroups, each consisting of 10 students. Each group will have a two-hour session . There will be two sessions for each group a week. ,one on Wednesday and the other onThursday . Each group will stay with a teacher for an hour , then move to the other teacher for another hour .The students will have four hours a week of direct supplemental instruction and there will be two teachers participating. The program will start in the first of February and will last till the end of May. It will start from 2:20 to 4:20PM. We are expecting at least 15 sessions. The first group will include students from K through 2nd grade and the second group students from 3rd through 5th grade.The program will focus on ELA and math. The teachers participating will be using a variety of resources to help the students and boost their language development.We will use textbooks, hand-outs, different hands-on activities besides online programs such as Starfall and Rosetta Stone. English will be the main language of instruction but the students' native languages can be used for help.The teachers participating are certified: one in ENL and the other in elementary education. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The school has a deep belief that all teachers should be familiar with ENL strategies and techniques to be able to engage ELLs in the instruction. Hence, there are frequent meetings between the ENL teacher and the other school staff. The school is also trying to invite an expert in language acquisition to meet with the teachers and give a high quality professional development session. The school sends the ENL teacher to different workshops and in turns he meets with the other staff to share the new findings and information. It is important that all the staff are aware of the challenges that enounter ELLs and the best techniques and practices to engage them in mainstream classes. The sessions will be held on Mondays and Tuesdays of every week and also during lunch times . Many topics regarding ENL will be covered like how ELLs are identified, strategies and techniques used , 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development assessments, how classroom teachers can engage ELLs. There will be copies of the topics discussed in each session with the time and signatures of teachers. Frequent visits to classroom teachers will be ongoing to ensure that ELLs are engaged. We will have 2 PDs in February and three in March, for a total of 5 days and 5 hours, with each lasting one hour. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The policy of P.S.213k is to engage parents in all school activities and events. We are also trying to involve parents in the responsibility of educating their children, so all fliers, circulars, and hand-outs are delivered to parents translated in their language of preference. The school has decided to open an English language class for parents of ELLs. The class will be held for a two- hour session on Friday of every week. The ENL teacher will be in charge. Adults can learn the language fast especially if they have background knowledge of the language.The students improve fast if there is someone at home who can speak English . He/she can help the children at least with the homework. The parents will also be active members in their community. In fact learning English will have a profound effect on the parents and the children. The children will advance academically and the parents will benefit economically. This part will be covered by the plan including the materials to be used The parents will be notified in writing and phone calls. We expect this part will begin and end at the same time as the students' program. We will have 3 PDs in February and three in March, for a total of 6 days and 6 hours, with each lasting one hour. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $1,300  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials $900 $1,000 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per sessions will be available for teachers securing instructional materials 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Securing additional materials for ELL  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 $3,200 N/A n/a n/a $3,200 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name New Lots School Borough Brooklyn School Number 213 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Stanley Moise Coach Keisha Criner ULIT Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Samir Akladious Teacher/Subject Area T. Schifbenbauer, Speech Teacher/Subject Area S. Burke, IEP/SETTS Related-Service Provider T. Schiffenbauer, Speech Superintendent Thomas McBryde, Jr. Assistant Principal G. Collins, AP Coach School Counselor Oneka Thompson Parent Janet Edwards Parent Coordinator Pauline Forbes Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program N/A Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program N/A D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 284 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.86% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students are assesssed in the beginning, middle and end of the year utilizing Running Records from Teacher's College. Additionally, Pre and Post assessments for reading and writing are ongoing. We adapted ReadyGen as our literacy curiculum we also use other suplimental materials for instruction such as Wilson's reading phonics based intervention program, Fundations and the reading comprehension focused Imagine It curriculum. There are now 26 Ells at this time, one in kindergarten, four in the first grade, five in second grade, four in the third grade, six in the fourth grade and seven in fifth grade. The Ell’s the ESL teacher services typically enroll at a lower level such as Beginner, and advance as they are serviced. This year there isone newly enrolled Arabic speaking student in the school system, in kindergarten. 2018-19 CEP 53  NYSESLAT exam report levels changed from the 2013-2014 school year to the most current NYSESLAT scores of the 2014-2015 school year from a 4 level progression to a 6 tiered path. Two students who entered in kindergarten last year as beginners and received ESL,tested at Entering level. The other two entered as advanced students and tested at Emerging and Transitional levels. Last year's first grade students were all beginners, now 2 tested NYSESLAT as a beginner and 1 progressed to the Emerging level. One of those students arrived from a Spanish speaking country for the first time last year and enrolled mid-year. Three of the four second graders started the year on the Intermediate level and moved up to Expanding, while the other student moved laterally to a Transitioning level. Two of last year's third graders started the grade midterm, are now at the Entering level. One student progressed from Beginner to Transitional. The other were intermediate students, and now one is Emerging and the other is Entering. All the Intermediate students in fourth grade progressed to the Expanding level.One student who was a beginner is now Entering level. Most of the students from Arabic speaking homes, which makes up almost half of our ELL population had the benefit of completing kindergarten in the NYC public school system. Many of them return to their native countries for up to two years then return to continue their education here. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We examine student proficiency after conducting assessment to consider placement 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ESL program is based on the results of all state tests such as NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. We believe we are meeting our AMAO critieria because the majority of our students have made progress on the NYSESLAT. In addition we are meeting AYP. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Through small class instruction and interventions, we create a tailored learning environment for our students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The results of the ELL interim assessments are shared with teachers during grade and extended day professional development conferences. Articulation between the ESL and classroom teacher is ongoing. This ensures that students are actively engaged in standards-based instruction. The implication for our school’s Response to Intervention begins with articulation between the ESL teacher and the classroom teacher. Once strengths & weakness are identified, a systematic research based program for improving language acquisition program is utilized such as Wilson's Fundations. Teacher’s plan tasks that encourage & support thinking, reading, speaking, writing and listening. The following services are provided for SIFE students - Academic Intervention Services (AIS), After School Programs and One on One ESL instruction. ELL’s with less than three years in U.S. schools are supported by the ESL push in program, small group classroom differentiated instruction in language arts and academic instructional services support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data shows that all across the grades, the students are achieving adequate yearly progress with the exception of the students who had interrupted schooling and some not all of the IEP students. In addition, the students are more proficient at speaking and listening, and least proficient at reading and writing. Most of the new students for the past few years have enterred at a beginning level of proficiency and many coming into the upper grades (2-5) have just arrived from their country with no English language skills whatsoever. Approximately half of the students speak Arabic, and arrived with no English skills, mostly into grades (2-5), and half of our ESL population come from Spanish speaking homes. Four studentshome language is Fulani and French. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We hold parent and family meetings to inform our parents and guardians and we also conduct parent meetings to support our parents and families 2018-19 CEP 54  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school uses both a pull-out and a push-in co-teaching organizational teaching model. In this model the ESL teacher pushes in with students of similar grades and levels to assist the teacher with making input comprehensible for the ESL students utilizing research based strategies such as Sheltered Teaching Methods, differentiation, scaffolding, adding background information, modeling and providing examples, using a dictionary and translator when necessary. When pulling out, the ESL teacher groups students according to the new NYSESLAT levels, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: NA c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students serviced in a push-in or pull-out capacity by the ESL teacher in our Freestanding ESL program based on their level. Entering and Emerging student levels receive 2 units of study or 360 minutes of instructional minutes by an ESL teacher weekly and, Transitioning and Expanding level students receive 1 unit of study or 180 minutes of instructional time by the ESL teacher weekly. Former ESL students receive .5 units of study or 90 instructional minutes. Students are grouped together according to their level and the ESL teacher pushes into one classroom with the group. Teachers cooperate so that their students are serviced appropriately. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers attend Professional development to learn about teaching strategies that will help them teach content areas to the ESL students. To make content comprehensible to ESL students, teachers use charts to empahize skills being taught, and illustrations to help simplify lessons. Each lesson is presented in a Multi-method Approach to reach all learners regardless of their preference including Visual, Kinesthetic and Audio. Sheltered Teaching including using the home language to aid understanding, using gestures and signaling, the use of Total Physical Therapy to help solidify learning. Teaching is scaffold and differentiated to help the students succeed at every task. Non-conventional methods are also employed to diversify learning to stimulate, motivate and create a non threatening environment where learning can thrive as they are engaged in fun activities such as the use of videos, Music, Games, Technology, Computers, and a smartboard or overhead projector. This fosters learning and second language acquisition can occur more naturally. Cultural relevance is added wherever possible to help bridge the gap between the American culture and their heritage by showing how the values are similar, etc. We believe it is important to offer lessons using content that reflects students' lives, interests and culture. 2018-19 CEP 55  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are first identified as an ESL student because they fail the NYSITELL, then the Spanish LAB is administered if the student's home language is Spanish. No other native language evaluation is done as our school only offers a monolingual ESL program known as Freestanding English as a Second Language (ESL) 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our school has students who have literacy and academic gaps due to the interruption of their formal education to return back to their country for a time. When they return they have to relearn much of what they were previously taught in the past. These learners require instruction in the basic concepts and skills necessary for academic success, including how to study and take notes, and how to participate in class discussions. These students are usually far behind their peers and easily frustrated to find this learning gap. Therefore a supportive environment is created that involves utilizing bilingual staff that speaks the same language and activity pairing with students who also speak the same language. These needs are recognized and specifically targeted by the ESL and classroom teachers. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Specially designed academic instruction in English (SDAIE) and CALLA is our teaching approach for teaching academic content, social studies, science, math and ELA to our English language learners. Besides using the sheltered strategies which were mentioned before, teachers collaborate to continually reinforce new concepts and language in academic instruction and integrate concepts across content areas and language/literacy classes. The ESL teacher is a focal point for this and assists to provide simplification of language and explicit instruction and translation. Every opportunity is sought where material can be shared across the contents and used to teach phonics, reading, vocabulary, grammar and comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ESL students with IEP's are served according to their IEP mandates and goals. There are currently five ESL students with an IEP. The IEP/SETTS and ESL teacher both work together with the classroom teacher to avoid scheduling conflicts, share learning goals and limitations to maximize their instruction and secure these student's academic success. The ESL teacher is provided a copy of the student's IEP and attends meetings involving changes to the IEP so the ESL teacher can be aware of how best to help this student. All service providers are involved in this process including the ESL, IEP/SETTS, and Speech teachers so they can all be involved in streamlining ideas and lessons and helping the student learn more effectively and reach their IEP goals. Students with IEP's are placed within the least restrictive environment and additionally, when the ESL teacher pushes in, she takes these students into a general education class and this way these students are given the opportunity to be educated with non-disabled peers. They have access to the general education curriculum and provided with supplementary aids such as a Para (Educational Assistant) and or the ESL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Services (AIS), After School Programs and One on One ESL instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Providing additional time with an ESL teacher or establishing a self contained ESL class in a co-teaching model with a teachers who speak the language of our studnets, one Spanish and one Arabic speaking teacher. If we enroll enough students across two consecutive grades this is one consideration which our ELL students may benefit from. 2018-19 CEP 56  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will continue to offer our Freestanding ESL program unless we enroll at least 15 students of Spanish speaking and/or 15 students who are Arabic native speakers in two to three consecutive grades. In this case we will eliminate our push-in ESL program and offere a self contained ESL classroom with an ESL teacher and a para who speak the students' native language. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Ells are afforded equal access to all school programs and are given preference often being mandated and assigned Academic Intervention Services (AIS), After School Programs and One on One ESL instruction. As state testing time approaches, our After School program begins and letters are sent home making the ESL students participation mandatory. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to support ELL instruction: Real World Phonics, Words Their Way vocabulary, Reading Comprehension, video, audio and computer instruction administered by the ESL Teacher. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Instruction is delivered in English in our Freestanding ESL program, however, translation and interpretation services are used if necessary for communicating all official letters from the school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Appropriate age and level material is used as determined by Common Core Learning Standards and Core Knowledge Sequence is also consulted to supplement material. Teaching is targeted to bring students from where they are to make progress and catch up to where they are supposed to be. Assessments help guide instruction to determine what skills have been mastered and what needs to be retaught during small group instruction and homework assignments. Continued transitional support for the students reaching proficiency on the NYSELAT is supported by subject area teachers and student mainstreaming. The content area instructional component shall provide grade and age level appropriate instruction in the required content area subjects in English supported by English as a second language methodologies, employed in a systematic and structured way and shall be designed to develop cognitive skills of limited English proficient students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used to support ELL instruction: Real World Phonics, Words Their Way vocabulary, Reading Comprehension, video, audio and computer instruction administered by the ESL Teacher. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the beginning of the year the school holds an ELL Parent Orientation where both the students and parents are invited to attend and information is shared to assist the student enrollment and transition into this new school system. The Parent Coordinator is involved and Parents along with the Ells are invited to ongoing activities such as Take your kids to school day, Book clubs, Movie Night etc. In addition the servive providers and teachers who will be working with these children throughout the school year work together to assist the students with making a smooth transition. They are available for any questions and for targeted educational assistance. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer a foreign language program at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 2018-19 CEP 57  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided to all staff by experienced pedagogues during grade and extended day professional development weekly meetings. New teachers receive mandatory ESL training from the regional support staff and additional training throughout the school year. The ESL teaher attends monthly training network meetings and additional Professional Developent offered externally 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have a list of helps such as glassaries from the Board of Education website, picture dictionaries and bilingual dictionaries, computers for using interactive websites for learning English. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The English as a new language teacher receives a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours for language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? R Part 154 of the New York state Commissioner of Educations Regulations requires school districts to provide parents of new English language learners (ELL’s) an orientation session on state standards, assessments, school expectations and program requirements for bilingual education and English as a second language (ESL) programs. The orientation shall be provided in English or when necessary in the parents’ home language. Parents of ESL students attend an orientation at the beginning of the year. This orientation is held immediately after enrollment for late registrants. During orientation, they are apprised of available program options for their child including pull-out services. They then work with the LPT team to determine the ideal program requirements for their child. Parents are then updated on their child’s progress throughout the year during parent-teacher conferences. Based on parent feedback from previous years, the ESL teacher has also expanded the ESL program to include periodic assessment reports to keep parents consistently informed of student progress. At the end of the academic year, parents meet with both the ESL and classroom teachers to discuss the program’s success. The the LPT team uses both student academic data and parental feedback to revise the ESL program annually. In addition, parents of ELL’s have access to the parent coordinator who organizes functions year-round for the benefit of all students, including ELL’s. Our school also supports community affairs that benefit ELL’s such as free ESL classes, tutoring, volunteer support groups and free translation services. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to such activities such as educational trips, tournaments, recitals, PTA meetings, fundraisers for charities that benefit children, Family Day Feast, school fairs, book clubs, and workshops held by the Board of Education or at other schools such as Parents Support about Let’s Talk, and Basic English For Spanish Speakers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Stanley Moise, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19k School Name: The New Lots School Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBr The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Tiffany Starks Secretary no no * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents or guardians of newly enrolled students are required to complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). This informs us of the language needs of the parents of English Language Learners. The classroom teachers, testing coordinator and parent coordinator as well as the ESL teacher work together to make sure the language needs of our students and their parents are met. All official correspondence is sent home in the parents' native language. In addition, there is an ELL parent orientation meeting at the beginning of the year to answer any questions the parents may have. The material is presented in the parent's native language and there is also staff on hand who speak Arabic, French, Haitian Creole and Spanish, the home languages of our ESL community. However, if necessary, The Translation and Interpretation Unit of the Board of Education will be utilized for interpretation services. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral In the past 8 years our ESL population has consisted of mostly Spanish speaking backgrounds, however, most recently we have received students whose dominant home language is Arabic. There are teachers and paras in-house as well as a secretary who speaks at least one of these languages. In this way documents can be quickly translated in the necessary language, we have not needed to look for a tranlator. However, should the need arise, we will utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the Board of Education for interpretation services. Arabic Arabic Arabic/Bengali 75% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Arabic and Bengali Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Official correspondence for the parents of ELL's will be sent home in the their home language according to their Home Language Identification Survey(HLIS). In-house staff, including secretaries and teachers who are fluent in the appropriate language translate the 2 times/per month translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. translation will be provided via our ESL 2018-19 CEP 63  documents for the school. Whenever needed, the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the Board of Education will be used to ensure timely execution of notice disemination to the parents of ELL's. Every year a handbook is distributed. This year the language backgrounds are: Spanish and Arabic, teacher and paras 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Every year the school hosts many face to face meetings with parents, including parent-teacher conferences, orientation and other activities. The foreign language speaking staff is in attendance and on call for when parents who need translation services come in. This staff is also utilized for any other needs that arise, including guidance counselor or calls to the student home if needed. 2 meetings/per month plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Via our paras or through translation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our goal is to ensure that students as well as parents properly supported with the assistance needed for success. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 64  Parents are made aware of translation and interpretation services when students are enrolled and there is a welcome poster visible to parents. The parents are provided with the Parents Bill of Rights and Guide to Language Access at enrollment and at orientation. Extra forms are on hand in the main office on the table next to the other pertinent school information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent feedback is gathered at face to face meetings held throughout the year as well as surveys conducted yearly. In addition, parents can meet with teachers at a scheduled time every week during the 50 minute period that is set aside for parent outreach and involvement. 2018-19 CEP 65 
