2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 22K222 School Name: P.S. 222 KATHERINE R. SNYDER Principal: THERESA OLIVIERI 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 222 K-5 332200010222 3301 Quentin Road 718-998-4298 School Number (DBN): 22K222 718-339-2107 Phone Number: Kathleen Snow Fax: ksnow@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mrs. Theresa Olivieri Ms. Kathleen Kelly Cracciollo Mrs. Kim Rios Ms. Sandy George N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 22 Ms. Julia Bove Superintendent: 5619 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 111234 Superintendent’s Office Address: JBove@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-968-6248 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7187594872 Phone Number: 7187593909 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mrs. Theresa Olivieri Ms. Kathleen Kelly Cracciollo Ms. Kim Rios Ms. Lucille Grilli N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Mr. Charles Turbak Member/Parent Ms. Lucy Cruz Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Dana Truce Ms. Meghan Kuhner Ms. Rita Rohde Lisa Arroyo Ms. Kathleen Snow Ms. Annette Maresca Ms. Fallon Luino Ms. DanielleMottola Ms. Sandy George Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Paraprofessional Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At PS 222 we celebrate cultural, ethnic and academic diversity. We believe that maintaining high expectations for all of our students including English Language Learners and Special Education students is critical to their success. We are dedicated to the education of the whole child and strive to create an atmosphere in which all students are nurtured emotionally and receive the support necessary to excel academically. We recognize that all children bring their own templates of individual talents and learning styles. 2018-19 CEP 9  At P.S. 222, we incorporate the Principles of Learning and Habits of Mind into every area of the curriculum in order to foster academic excellence in all of our students. It is our firm belief that by maintaining academic rigor in a respectful and nurturing environment, we will help all of our children to reach their fullest potential. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In this learning community, of grades Kindergarten through fifth, we welcome an ethnically diverse community within the neighborhood of Marine Park in Brooklyn, NY. In June 2018 we had 939 children attending our school who come from various ethnic, cultural, and economic backgrounds. At P.S. 222, we celebrate that each child is unique and our approach provides for flexible grouping and individualized instruction. Our goal is to teach children to be active participants in their own learning and develop into productive citizens while showing respect for the differences of others. In addition to our general education program, which has 6 Enrichment classes and 15 Regular Education classes, our school includes 8 Integrated Co-Teaching classes, 6 ASD Nest classes and 5 Self-contained Special Education classes. At P.S. 222 we believe parents are partners in their children’s education. Through an open line of communication, we inform parents of their child’s goals and their progress towards meeting those goals. In addition, we invite parents to share their insights and concerns regarding their child’s education. We take pride in the success of our students. In order to achieve this level of success, we first promote a close home/school relationship. We are pleased to have partnerships with Madison High School Law program, TASC, Brooklyn College, Working Parents Alliance and Star Gazers Summer Camp. Through these agencies we are able to provide students with enrichment activities, physical education and homework help. Our school has served as a model for the Least Restrictive Environment Initiative and the Integrated Co-Teaching Program. P.S. 222 is a barrier-free school that serves physically challenged students in both general and special education. Student Support Services include: English as a New Learner, Speech Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Hearing and Vision Education, School Assessment Team, Adaptive Physical Education, and Guidance Counseling. We also offer support through Academic Intervention Services, Inquiry Teams, SETSS, IEP Teacher and targeted before and after school programs. During the 2017-2018 school year we expanded the use of the research-based technology program, iReady, to include first grade students. This program offered support in the areas of mathematics and literacy. We also utilized the Rosetta Stone program for our English Language Learners and their parents. P.S. 222 strives to provide all students with a rigorous school experience that includes academic challenges, enrichment opportunities, and character education. We promote critical thinking in all subject areas. We recognize that data-driven instruction is essential for success and we use findings to drive instruction. In an effort to increase student achievement, teachers assess students, guide students in goal setting, and plan lessons based on needs. We provide our staff with high quality differentiated professional development based on the needs of our teachers. In addition, teachers use the Danielson Framework to set goals and to assess their personal growth. Collectively, we work toward a shared vision while maintaining an instructional focus; peer to peer assessment, self-assessment and actionable feedback will be integrated into all curriculum areas form instructional groups to increase student learning and engagement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At P.S. 222, we strive to meet the needs of all students. A special population that we serve is Students with Autism Spectrum Disorders. These students need additional social and emotional supports, such as assistance with socialization, developing relationships, and pragmatic language. 2018-19 CEP 10  We service this population through our ASD Nest Program. The ASD Nest Program is a partnership between the NYC DOE and New York University’s (NYU) ASD Nest Support Project. This program serves students with Autism Spectrum Disorders and typically developing students in a reduced class-size Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) model. There are two teachers (one special education teacher and one general education teacher) in each class, who receive specialized training prior to working with their students. In addition, our program is supported by an ASD Nest Coach/Cluster, two ASD Speech Therapists, one Occupational Therapist, Guidance Counselor, and Social Worker. This special population receives Social Development Intervention (SDI). SDI is an evidence-based program that supports the social/emotional development of ASD Nest students. Students participate in SDI three to five times per week in small groups. The SDI curriculum is designed to help children develop relationships and improve social functioning and pragmatic language. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P.S. 222 met all of our CEP Goals for the 2017-2018 school year. A review of our Mid-Year and End of Year data indicate we made the greatest progress in the area of Collaborative Teachers. Our vision was to create four literacy units targeting Social Studies for each grade. We continued to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff towards this vision. We increased the number of inter-visitations, differentiated professional learning opportunities and time for collaboration, resulting in the creation of four units per grade. For this school year, one area of focus for us will be Supportive Teachers. We will support teachers as they ensure culturally responsive instruction while creating supportive and challenging classrooms across all curriculum areas for all learners including students with disabilities and English as New Language learners by collaborating with teacher teams and using actionable feedback, peer-to-peer assessment and self-assessment to increase student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K222 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 932 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 50 49 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 5 17 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 54.0% % Attendance Rate 46.6% % Reduced Lunch 10.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 17.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 45.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 71.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 110 107 95.0% 7.2% 23.0% 13.2% 21.4% 2.3% 4 7% 7.5 75.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The comprehensive analysis of various data sources revealed the following: P.S. 222’s strength relative to Rigorous Instruction is that we have continued to increased the level of rigor evident in daily instruction. We are committed to providing our students with instruction that will prepare them to become critical thinkers and productive citizens. A strength at our school is our staffs’ ability to collaborate during professional learning time to look closely at assessments to identify areas of concern, possible causes, and next steps. Teachers also review lessons, pacing and make necessary adjustments. We utilize the Go Math! program to support mathematical proficiency and supplemental materials from Engage NY and other researched based programs. During the 2017-2018 school year, we continued with our Revised Workshop Model in Mathematics. We utilized the “With To/By” model to increase student engagement and differentiate instruction based on formative assessments. In addition, we noticed an increase in best practices and techniques that were offered as a universal entry point for all students. For example, we noticed across a vast majority of classrooms teachers using the 3 Read and Number Talks in daily lessons. These strategies were particularly beneficial for ENL students and students with disabilities. For example, Number Talks rely on mathematical reasoning as opposed to a word problem that requires proficient reading skills. On the other hand, the 3 Read incorporates close reading to support these subgroups. Student engagement and learning increased across all classrooms as evident by our grade level standard assessment. Every class participates in a beginning and end-of-year math assessment. There was a 40% increase in grade level knowledge; beginning of the year assessment showed 43% of student mastery and this increased to 83% by the end of the year. For the 2018-2019 school year our priority need in the area of Rigorous Instruction is Mathematics. Specifically, we will focus on integrating Mathematical Practices 3 and 4 in the planning and execution of lessons. The analysis of student performance across the grades on formative and summative assessments throughout the 2017-2018 school year, revealed a need to improve students' ability to construct a viable argument and be able to critique the reasoning of others. We want our students to develop into mathematically proficient students who are able to use mental math activities to develop and enhance their level of content knowledge. In addition, we want our students to use physical objects, drawings and graphs to represent mathematical situations and problems. Our 2018 New York State Math testing data showed that of our students in Grades 3, 4, 5 scored in Levels 3 & 4. In addition, the teachers gather pertinent data through formative assessments daily. Therefore, their observations and assessment data are pivotal elements when discussing student achievement, necessary improvements, and "Quick 2018-19 CEP 13  Changes." The 2017 end of year summative mathematics assessment data showed a school average of 83%. Therefore, an increase of 3% in this area was determined for the 2017-2018 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, we will increase math proficiency across all grades levels by emphasizing Mathematical Practice 3 and 4 as evidenced by a 20% increase in the percentage of students scoring at or above grade level benchmarks by comparing the results of the September 2018 and the June 2019 grade assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K - 5 9/2018- Administration and Math Support Staff 6/2019 K – 5 9/2018- Administration and Math Support Staff 6/2019 All teachers 9/2018- Administration and Math Support Staff Administration and Math Support Staff 6/2019 9/2018- 6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Administration and Math Support Staff Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunities to highlight best practices such as inter visitations, model lessons, and utilizing professional resources to implement Mathematical Practices 3 and 4. Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunities in how to implement inquiry based mathematical practices. This will be evidenced by explicit modeling, inter-visitations, and demonstration lessons. Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunities to explore various techniques such as the 3-Act, how to promote mathematical discourse into daily math lessons. Provide teachers with monthly collaborative inquiry time during Monday professional learning to enhance lessons to incorporate activities where students have an opportunity to engage in mathematical discourse and utilize mathematics tools. Provide teachers with monthly professional resources, such as articles and book excerpts to enhance professional knowledge in mathematical pedagogy during Team Meetings and Monday Professional Learning activities. The systems that will permit oversight are: weekly learning walks; weekly Instructional Lead Team meetings; review of professional learning feedback; cycles of observations; and data analysis. Three administrators will view a minimum of 2 teachers a week as our point of reference for this goal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement K-5 K-5 K-5 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration and Math Support Staff, Instructional Lead Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will offer parent workshops devoted to Mathematical Practice 3 and 4. Teachers will offer at least two workshops over the school year targeting these mathematical practices; for example, sessions will target how to help students self-assess at home. In addition, we will continue to send home monthly mathematics newsletters to provide parents with examples of strategies to help their child at home. Ms. Hanley will ensure all teachers offer these learning experiences to the parent community. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Salaries for Classroom Teachers, Instructional Lead Team, SETSS Teachers, TESOLs, and Paraprofessionals.   Per Diem funds will be set aside for professional learning and for sending our Ambassadors and teachers to professional development.  Per Session funds will be used for a morning/afternoon support program.  Textbook funds will be set aside to purchase Go Math! and to purchase the texts It Makes Sense! Using Te-Frames to Build Number Sense by Melissa Conklin for Kindergarten Teachers and It Makes Sense! Using the Number Chart to Build Number Sense by Melisssa Conklin for Grade 1 Teachers.  We will also reach out to work in collaboration with Chris Quigley on the Math High 5 which focuses on creating Math Clubs (strategy based groups) for Kindergarten students.  Technology funds will be used to purchase I-Ready. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 school year, we will increase math proficiency across all grades levels as evidenced by a 10% in the percentage of students scoring at or above grade level benchmarks by comparing the results of the September 2018 and the February 2019 math assessment exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) State exam results, Chapter tests/Benchmark test, exit slips, and formative assessments, collection of student work to monitor MP 3 and 4. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The strength of P.S. 222 relative to Supportive Environment is that during the 2017-2018 school year, we achieved our goal in this area. Teachers created supportive environments by adapting instruction for all learners, including ENLs and SWDs using formative assessment. As a result, there was a 9% increase in the Measure of Teacher Performance targeting the Danielson Framework 3D: Using assessment in instruction from the 2016-17 school year to the current school year. Results from the 2017-2018, October 17, 2017 PPO visit encouraged continual work in the area of Assessment 2.2. Matthew P. Melchiorre suggested "Continue to provide teachers with resources and feedback to engage in in-the-moment assessment. For the 2018-2019 school year, our priority need in the area of Supportive Environment is enhancing the content knowledge and improve pedagogy in Mathematics and Literacy. Specifically, we will focus on using actionable feedback, peer to peer feedback, and student engagement in self assessment to improve student achievement in mathematics and literacy. We will target Danielson Framework 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, administration will collaborate with horizontal and vertical teams to create grade level assessments by aligning actionable feedback, peer-to-peer assessment and self-assessment to the learning targets to increase student achievement. As a result, there will be a 3% increase in the Measure of Teacher Performance targeting the Danielson Framework 3D: Using assessment in instruction. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunities to highlight best practices such as interactive workshops, inter visitations, model lessons, and utilizing professional resources to implement peer-to-peer assessment, self-assessment and actionable feedback. Provide teachers with monthly professional resources such as articles and text excerpts during Team Meetings and professional learning workshops. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers and Administration All Teachers 9/2018- Administration 6/2019 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers and administration Mathematics lessons and Literacy lessons will be observed and feedback will be provided to teachers in alignment with the Danielson Framework, specifically in the area of 3D. All Teachers Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunities targeting lesson planning across the grade to ensure a wide range of common effective pedagogical approaches are used in relation to assessment. Provide teachers with monthly professional learning time on Mondays or Tuesdays for the ENL Vertical Team to meet to share strategies and review progress. This team is made of the teachers of ENL students and the TESOLs. The principal will continue her study with the book Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills by Nonie K. Lesaux, Emily Galloway, and Sky Marietta with her cohort. This texts will be shared with the Instructional Lead Team, ESL Team and the staff through team meetings and Instructional Lead Team meetings. The systems that will permit oversight are: weekly learning walks; weekly Instructional Lead Team meetings; review of professional learning feedback; cycles of observations; and data analysis. Three administrators will view a minimum of 2 teachers a week as our point of reference for this goal. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers and administrative team ENL Vertical Team 9/2018-9/2019 Classroom Teachers and TESOLs. All Teachers and Administrators 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers and administration All 9/2018- teachers 6/2019 Teachers and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 18  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment. Our focus for this area is assessment. Therefore, teachers will not only share assessment data with parents but will provide them with the importance of engaging in self assessment of their work at home. Teachers will utilize Tuesday Parent Engagement time to conduct meetings, design workshops, and make phone calls to share progress with families. In addition, teachers will include student progress in this area on the January 2019 Progress Reports, which will be review by administration prior to distribution. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Salaries for Classroom Teachers, Instructional Lead Team, SETSS Teachers, TESOLs and Paraprofessionals.   Per Diem funds will be set aside for professional learning.  Per Session funds will be used for a morning/afternoon support program. Textbook funds will be set aside to purchase Go Math, additional copies of Number Talks by Sherry Parish, Guided Reading by Fountas and Pinnell, and Conferring with Readers by Jennifer Serravallo, and How Languages are Learned by Lightbown & Spada. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be 1.5% increase in the Measure of Teaching Performance targeting the Danielson Framework 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Rubric: Component 3D & Classroom observations, student work samples Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of P.S. 222 relative to Collaborative Teachers is that during the 2017-2018 school year we achieved our goal of creating 4 literacy units targeting Social Studies for each grade. To accomplish this goal we continued to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff towards this vision. We increased the number of inter-visitations, differentiated professional learning opportunities and time for collaboration, resulting in the creation of four units per grade. Our horizontal teacher teams met during professional learning time on Mondays, common preps and professional development days to review the Passport literacy resources, select appropriate materials, plan rigorous lessons, and design instructional support for ENLs and SWDs. In addition, teacher teams collaborated on the Embedded and Culminating Tasks that were administered for each Unit of Study. This work had a positive impact on students. Teachers researched and planned field trips so that students could have hands on experience, for example in Grade 3, the culture of Peru. The grade visited a local Peruvian restaurant where they were exposed to the foods native to Peru. While attending a museum visit with their child, parents complimented students for their prior knowledge and sharing what they knew which was related to their study on China. Results from the 2017-2018, October 17, 2017 PPO visit celebrated our work with the Instructional Core 1.1. Matthew P. Melchiorre stated "You ensure that Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work data so that individual and groups of students, including the lowest- and highest- achieving students, ELLs and SWDs, have access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaged. Units are collaboratively written to allow for teachers to make on-the-spot decisions. Additionally, instead of Passport standing in isolation you incorporated social studies into your English Language Arts units." Our 2018 NYS testing data showed that 71% of our students scored in levels 3 & 4 in ELA which denotes a ten percent increase from the previous year. An analysis of Collaborative Inquiry Team notes/surveys along with observation data indicates the following needs: * Modify the length of the Literacy Units * Remove and replace materials * Incorporate the arts into the literacy units to reflect interdisciplinary units of study Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 20  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will participate in professional learning and inquiry meetings as teacher teams targeting the integration of other disciplines into our Social Studies Literacy Units of Study to ensure culturally responsive instruction for all learners and as a result there will be aligned pacing calendars that will include art, music, dance and technology for two Units. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunities for all, including dance, art and music teachers to highlight best practices such as interactive workshops, inter-visitations, model lessons, book clubs and utilizing professional resources. All Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Provide teachers with monthly professional learning opportunity to collaborate with their grade and specialty teachers in order to ensure teachers are aligning other disciplines into our unit topics. All Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration and Literacy Support Staff Mathematics Support Staff Administration and Literacy Support Staff Mathematics Support Staff This will take place during summer planning days, after school planning days, team meetings, horizontal and vertical team meetings, daily interactions, staff development days, and conferences with administrators. Our District 22 Ambassadors and TESOLs will meet with classroom teachers to share best practices and will conduct professional learning workshops for our staff. The horizontal and vertical teams will use the P.S. 222 Units of Study Inquiry Protocol, as well as mid and end of unit checkpoint using the S.W.O.T protocol (Strengths, Weakness, Opportunities, Threats) The systems that will permit oversight are: weekly learning walks; weekly Instructional Lead Team meetings; review of professional learning feedback; cycles of observations; and data analysis. Three administrators will view a minimum of 2 teachers a week as our point of reference for this goal. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration and Ambassadors All Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration, Literacy Support Staff, and Teachers All 9/2018- Teachers 6/2019 Teachers and administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to provide students with challenging and engaging lessons aligned to the Next Generation Standards. In order to support families, we will provide families with an overview of our enhanced Social Studies infused literacy units of study, which will include art, music, dance, and technology. 2018-19 CEP 22  Parents will be invited to visit their child's class to celebrate their efforts for each unit of study through the culminating projects. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Salaries for Classroom Teachers, Instructional Lead Team, SETSS Teachers, TESOLs and Paraprofessionals.   Per Diem funds will be set aside for professional learning.  Textbook funds will be set aside to purchase books for professional readings/research based on the needs of the teams.  Technology funds will be set aside for computers, laptops, I-pads and Lego Robotics kits. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of teachers will participate in professional learning and inquiry meetings to collaborate and develop opportunities throughout the Social Studies literacy units to incorporate art, music, dance and technology. This will result in the creation of 2 revised literacy units per grade by May 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Horizontal Team Notes, classroom observations, student presentations, Instructional Lead Team Notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of P.S. 222 relative to Effective School Leadership is that during the 2017-2018 school year, we achieved our goal in this area. Teachers created engaging environments by adapting instruction for all learners, including ENLs and SWDs using various techniques and challenging tasks. As a result, there was a 12% increase in the Measure of Teacher Performance targeting the Danielson Framework 3C: Student Engagement from the 2016-17 school year to the current school year. Results from the 2017-2018, October 17, 2017 PPO visit encouraged continual work in the area of Assessment 2.2. Matthew P. Melchiorre suggested "Continue to provide teachers with support as they release ownership of instruction to students." . For the 2018-2019 school year, our priority need in the area of Effective School Leadership is enhancing the content knowledge and improve pedagogy in Mathematics and Literacy. The Instructional Lead Team will enhance the level of content knowledge in mathematics and literacy and target the Danielson Framework 1A: Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, administration will enhance the level of content knowledge in mathematics and literacy to provide effective ENL instruction using Advanced Literacy in all subject areas and as a result, there will be a 3% increase in the Measure of Teacher Practice targeting the Danielson Framework 1A: Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The administrative team will setup and follow a schedule for teacher observations and provide actionable feedback aligned to selected competencies from a research-based framework, specifically in the area of 3C. Each administrator will observe a minimum of 2 teachers per week. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the administrative team will provide professional development in the use of a research-based framework during monthly team meetings, horizontal and vertical team meetings, daily interactions and/or staff development days on creating authentic and independent tasks. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the administrative team will utilize highly effective teachers as models for the implementation of best practices and celebrate these practices by presenting selected practices at team meetings and schedule inter-visitations for demonstrations, based on need. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration & Ambassadors All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration & Ambassadors All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration & Ambassadors The District 22 Ambassadors will turnkey effective strategies to staff learned at the monthly meetings All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration & Ambassadors To provide differentiated instruction, we offer our new and returning intensive 1:1 or small group support to implement this initiative, based on need. All new and returning teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Ambassadors and New/Returning Teachers This year, the Vertical Math team will meet bimonthly to create and enhance authentic math tasks and turn key to their horizontal teams. The systems that will permit oversight are: weekly learning walks; weekly Instructional Lead Team meetings; review of professional learning feedback; cycles of observations; and data analysis. Three administrators will view a minimum of 2 teachers a week as our point of reference for this goal. Vertical Math Team 9/2018-6/2019 Administrators and Ambassadors All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 25  We will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership. Our focus for this area is engaging students in learning. Therefore, teachers will share assessment data with parents and provide next steps based on the students work in class. Teachers will utilize Tuesday Parent Engagement time to conduct meetings and make phone calls to share progress with families. In addition, each teacher will send home progress reports in January 2019. These progress reports will be reviewed by the administrative team prior to distribution. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Salaries for Classroom Teachers, Instructional Lead Team, SETSS Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. Per Diem funds will be set aside for professional learning. Per Session funds will be used for a morning support program. Textbook funds will be set aside to purchase professional reading materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 60% of teachers will be observed twice and will be provided with aligned actionable feedback from an administrator, specifically targeting Danielson 3C. There will be a 1.5% increase in the overall MOTP score in the area of 3C. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review progress in the area of Danielson's Framework: Engaging Students in Learning/3C after each cycle of observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strength of P.S. 222 relative to Strong Family and Community Ties is that during the 2016-2017 school year, we achieved our goal in this area. Throughout the year, parent learning experiences were offered in both literacy and mathematics. In addition, we created parent newsletters and a parent mathematics guide as a resource to support learning at home. We felt it was imperative to keep parents informed about our instructional practices and offer helpful hints for supporting their child at home. Our feedback from our latest Quality Review Parent meeting indicated that there has been and continues to be a strong family - school connection. Our parent community supports not only their own child, but the entire school community at large in a myriad of ways. For example, parents/guardians volunteer for different school events, they organize fundraisers, and attend classroom celebrations. School Community events such as the Character Parade, Flash Mob, Kickball Tournament, student performances, and publishing celebrations are well attended. Workshops on Mathematics and Literacy strategies were offered to support families with understanding the curriculum. In order to best support parents/guardians and strengthen the family and community ties, we reflected on the supports offered to parents throughout the 2016-2017 school year and consulted with the School Leadership Team. Based on their suggestion, we will increase the number of in class parent engagement opportunities to build stronger relationships between the classroom teachers and the family. We will do this through a parent survey on topics they wish for further support in. Parents feel free to elicit our advice to improve their child's academic achievement as well as their social emotional development. We can site numerous examples; for instance, administration was approached by a third grade parent regarding her daughter and her social emotional needs. We scheduled a meeting with this mother and then a meeting with the student and her mother. After gathering information, we devised an action plan. The action plan included 'lunch and learn' experiences and additional meetings with administration. The 'lunch and learn' experience utilizes specific learning targets. It became known as 'girl power' lunches. As a result, the aforementioned student created and maintained relationships with at least two classmates. The 2016-2017 Framework For Great Schools Parent Survey indicates that 87% of parents/guardians agreed/agreed strongly that they are invited to visit the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 27  By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, we will provide parent engagement opportunities which will result in a 1.5% increase from 92% to 93.5% in the percentage of parents who will agree or strongly agree that families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers will invite families to their classrooms for celebrations & small group workshops a minimum of two times per year. The Instructional Lead Team will schedule a series of parent workshops on mathematical practices throughout the school year for parents/guardians. The workshops will include strategies for all learners. Parents & Guardians Parents & Guardians Our Parent Coordinator will survey parents to determine the need for additional workshops and parent experiences. Parents & Guardians 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 Classroom Teachers 9/18-6/19 Mathematics/Literacy Support Staff, Classroom Teachers, Administration Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers Teachers will submit the invitations and attendance for each event to the Instructional Lead Team in December and March. Parents and Guardians 9/18-6/19 Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session for after school parent workshops, OTPS for refreshments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will have offered at least one parent engagement opportunities per class during the school day. This will be measured by attendance sheets, School Leadership Team feedback, PA meeting feedback, and feedback from Parent Coordinator workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will assess progress using the parent Involvement calendar, parent surveys, and workshop attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA score F&P level Report card rubric classroom performance NYS Math score Chapter test results classroom performance NYS Science score classroom performance Teacher recommendation classroom performance Parent/Guardian request classroom performance Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading, Fundations/Wilson, iReady, myOn Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, 1:1 During school day, morning program Go Math!, EnVision resources, Revised Workshop Model, manipulative materials, scaffolding Re-teach, push-in, scaffolding Small group, 1:1 During school day, morning program Small group 1:1 During school day Re-teach, push-in, Small group, 1:1 During school day Small group, 1:1 During school day Scaffolding Habits of Mind/Academic and Personal Behaviors lessons 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not applicable Not applicable Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  With the funding we have received, it is our intention to provide services for the STH population. It is our plan to utilize this money to purchase and replenish school supplies, any needed materials throughout the school year, and to pay for students to attend field trips. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not applicable 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not applicable Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not applicable 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local $105,407 $5061, 150 x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 35  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Not Applicable N/A N/A N/A Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template Not Applicable School-Parent Compact (SPC) N/A N/A I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 38 N/A N/A N/A N/A I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 39  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 40  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 222's Title III program will offer supplemental services to a designated group of 1st - 5th grade English Language Learners. This year's morning program will service at risk entering, emerging, and expanding students in grades 1-2 as well as new entering ENLs and emerging and expanding 3-5 students. In grades 1-2, Rigby Readers and On Our Way to English books will be used to address the students reading fluency and comprehension skills. Elements of Fundations will be implemented to foster letter recognition, sounds, and sentence formation. In grades 3-5, Ladders readers will be used in order to help with reading comprehension as well as test taking strategies. These readers come in three different levels; high, medium, and low. Having these levels will ensure that all students are reading the same text at different but at different reading levels. The Title III program will provide instruction beyond their mandated requirements. The rationale for our program is supported by research that has shown students who participate in support programs have improved academically, increased their positive attitudes and behaviors that provide a direct link to success in school. This is especially true for struggling ELL students (McLaughlin, 2012; Miller, 2003, Hall, et. al, 2004). Upon reviewing the results from last year's NYSESLAT scores we will tailor the program towards developing and strengthening all four modalities; Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. As stated by Wayne E. Wright in his article “Let Them TALK!” which appears in the February (2016) issue of Educational Leadership “The better ELLs can speak and understand English, the better they can read and write it.” In alignment with an emphasis on oral development as evident in the Common Core Speaking and Listening Standards we will focus on comprehension, collaboration, and the presentation of knowledge and skills. To provide home language support, we translate our monthly reading letters in Russian, Chinese, Spanish, Urdu, and Arabic.. The 2 day a week program, has a start date of 10/3/18 and an ending date of Thursday, 06/06/19 with direct instruction to a targeted group of twenty 1st - 2nd grade students and twenty 3rd - 5th grade students. This Title III class size will offer students the opportunity for individualized instruction in a supportive and enriching environment. The upper grade students were identified by their Spring 2018 NYSESLAT scores, with additional data determined using NYS ELA scores, and NYSITELL scores. The students range in proficiency levels and include new arrivals as well as long term ELLS. Data from classroom and informal assessments will be reviewed throughout the year to target the needs of this focus group. The program has been designed to add instructional support for the participating students. The Title III program addresses all four language processes; reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Besides providing test preparation for the NYSESLAT and for the New York State ELA Assessment, the students will learn how to use English in social situations through the modality of Academic Discussions as well as in academic functions; in the school setting and in the content areas. Differentiated activities will be incorporated in the instruction to address the different stages of language development. The Title III program is designed to assist the students 2018-19 CEP 41  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information in the development of key language skills, addressing English grammar, sounds, word forms, and word meaning. The Title III program will be instructed by Ms. Connolly a New York State fully accredited certified and licensed TESOL teacher and Mrs. Mavrides, a New York State fully licensed Bilingual teacher and TESOL, and Ms. Derasmo, a New York State fully licensed teacher and ESOL. English will be the language of instruction. The Wednesday/Thursday program is the only Title III program held at our school at this time. The series of books will focus on fictional and non-fictional literature while improving the students' language and writing skills. Some examples of the themes include geography, animal studies, our bodies, city life, our country and ultimately concluding with a global perspective. The program emphasizes higher-order thinking through the use of graphic organizers, guided and independent reading practice and academic discussions. Our school will support our grades 1 - 2 students with leveled readers from “On Our Way To English”, which would be at no cost to the program. The students in grades 3 - 5 will have extra support through National Geographic Science and Social Studies “Ladders” leveled books. Differentiated reading instruction is integrated into the curriculum, along with a comprehensive assessment tool. The program will supplement quality classroom instruction with the technology support of Brain POP and Brain POP Junior. This program includes educational videos that will enhance the units of study along with the reading material that the students will utilize. Research has shown that incorporating technology in our instruction will help prepare our students with the know-how and skills that they need to succeed in today's society. We analyze the NYSESLAT results to determine next steps. This is coupled with the formative assessments gathered daily. In addition to using these results, we will monitor the progress of these students using the embedded and culminating tasks from the unit. The findings are discussed during LA (Language Acquisition) team meetings. At the completion of the program, Ms. Connolly, Mrs. Mavrides and our administrators will look at the data generated from the students who attended the program and evaluate the results. Our conclusions will form the framework for next year's program. Parents will receive an invitation from the TESOL teachers to join the program. We will utilize in-house translators, and over the phone translations to ensure that all eligible parents are aware of the support program available for their child. We will create an attendance sheet for those involved in the program. This will be maintained by the TESOL teachers. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale of our professional development program plan is to provide ongoing high-quality rigorous opportunities in which skills and strategies can be developed to enhance Title III instruction as well as improve overall school wide performance. Ms. Connolly and Mrs. Mavrides, our TESOL certified teachers will be attending professional development workshops offered through the Brooklyn South Field Support Center. They will participate in the "Response to Intervention (RTI) Interactive Online Course" and will take part in events offered by Office of English Language Learners. The developed skills and 2018-19 CEP 42  Part C: Professional Development instructional resources acquired at these workshops will be turn-keyed throughout the year, mainly on Monday and Tuesday’s during scheduled learning opportunities, monthly team meetings and on staff development days. In addition, our ENL teachers will meet with the classroom teachers of the targeted ELLs on a weekly basis to collaborate and share ideas on best practices and student achievement. The aforementioned professional development opportunities will be conducted in English and will be supplemental to the school's general Professional Developmental Plan. The Department of English Language Learners (DELLSS) offers a number of resources; publications and videos that can be explored and turn-keyed by our ENL teachers Ms. Connolly and Mrs. Mavrides to our classroom teachers. A series of workshops have been scheduled that will promote collaboration and exchange among the staff. The sessions will be held on the following dates: Date: October 2018 Topic 1: ENL Kick-off: Analyze NYSESLAT scores, sharing best practiced for ENL students. Rationale: We will explore Spring 2018 NYSESLAT Scores and use that data to provide effective instruction to meet the needs of our ELL students. In this workshop we will explore and interpret the CR- 154 to ensure that ENL students are provided opportunities to achieve the same educational goals and standards as their peers. December 2018 Topic 2: Technology Integration Rationale: Using Technology to help drive our curriculum is an essential component to motivate ENL learners. Technology offers mobility, increases student engagement and motivation, teaches valuable tools for the future, and promotes learner independence. Programs such as the online site, News ELA, offers a tool that increases reading comprehension alongside to Current Events. Articles are available at 5 different levels so that the class can read the same content, but at a level that's best for each individual student. March 2019 Topic 3: Teaching Advanced Literacy for ELL's : Hallmarks 1 and 2 In this workshop we will explore Hallmark 1 and 2 of Advanced Literacy which will help to establish a common set of instructional practices in all classrooms. Hallmark 1 will focus on working with a variety of texts that feature Big Ideas and rich content for our ELL's. Hallmark 2 will focus on discussions for ELLs that build both conversational and academic language and knowledge. May 2019 Topic 4: Teaching Advanced Literacy for ELLs: Hallmarks 3 and 4 In this workshop we will explore Hallmark 3 and 4 of Advanced Literacy which will focus on daily writing and vocabulary development. Hallmark 3 will focus on using writing to build language and knowledge. We will compare traditional vs. 21st Century instructional writing practices. Hallmark 4 will focus on studying a small set of high utility vocabulary words to increase reading comprehension for ELLs. For each of these workshops a sign-in sheet will be required. Participants will receive an agenda and it will be maintained in our Professional Learning Portfolio in the Principal's office. 2018-19 CEP 43  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will receive an invitation from the TESOL teachers to join the program. Utilizing the use of in-house translators, Big Word, and over the phone translations, we will ensure that all eligible parents are aware of the support program available for their child. We will create an attendance sheet for those involved in the program. This will be maintained by the TESOL teachers. When parents are involved in their child's education, then the learning experience for the child is enhanced; therefore, it is incumbent upon the school community to inform and educate families, especially our ELL families. Don Bagin, Donald R. Gallagher and Edward H. Moore (2008) agreed "A good school-community relations program should encompass the concept of a partnership between the school and the parent". Therefore, we offer opportunities to partner with these families. Translation services are offered by our bilingual personnel who are available to assist the parents during the enrollment process and for all parent-school meetings. Also, we encourage parents to utilize outside resources and provide them with a listing of neighborhood-based ENL instructional adult programs. Information is translated and disseminated to parents such as adult English classes available in the district, Dial-A-Teacher homework help, parent surveys. Moreover, our Parents' Association president makes a continual effort to include our ELL parents in the various school events that are held. Also, she attends the orientation meetings so she can introduce herself to the parents. The PA president, along with our parent coordinator, and ENL teachers facilitate building relationships by using the "buddy system". They join parents up so that the non-English speaking parents feel comfortable participating in and becoming actively involved in the school community. We are fortunate to have in our school many families that are willing to reach out and help each acclimate to the academic and social atmosphere within our community. In addition, we will host on-going parent workshops on Tuesday afternoons to help facilitate relationships. Topics will vary; we will target social interactions, daily communication skills, and how to help their child with homework. We will provide a lending library for parents to allow them to choose a correct leveled book for their child. A take-home bag is prepared and given to each of the parents of our targeted students with their initial participation. This take-home bag empowers the parent with tools and means that are accessible to them, as it helps them support their child's social and academic growth. Bilingual guide books, dictionaries and trade books are included in the bag along with nutritional advice and other pertinent information. Parents are notified of these activities through a translated flyer or letter. Translation services are utilized as written correspondence and oral translations are offered to all parents who request such services. Translation services permit families to feel welcome and acknowledge their role as an integral part of our school community. Finally, our ENL room has a plethora of resources. For example, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual books, and bilingual parent guide books are readily available for all ELL parents. A series of workshops will be offered on a monthly basis with the intention and design of empowering the parents of our English Language Learners through knowledge and language. The sessions will be held on Tuesday afternoons during parent engagement form 2:35 2018-19 CEP 44  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities – 3:15. Our ENL teacher Theresa Connolly and our bilingual certified teacher Pietra Mavrides will be the presenters at each of the sessions. September 24, 2018 from 2:34 to 3:15 Topic 1: Introduction to the ENL Program for Incoming Students/Updates on Continuing ENL Students Rationale: Parents of students who have been identified as entitled to receive ENL services will be introduced to the available ENL programs to help them make the best choice for their child. Parents of students that are continuing in the ENL program will receive updated information as to their child's performance level and services. Opportunity for questions will be provided in multiple languages. November 13, 2018 from 2:35 - 3:15 Topic 2: Preparing for Parent Conference Rationale: Parents will be informed of their rights during a conference as well as being given a list of pertinent questions that they can ask regarding their child's academic/social progress in the classroom. We will work with the parents to create a Before, During and After Conferences Checklist. January 8, 2019 from 2:35 - 3:15 Topic: 3 Developing Academic Vocabulary Rationale: Parents will be given a Picture Vocabulary Book with pictures and words of commonly used words that can help with reading and writing at home. Modeling will be provided on how to use the bilingual dictionaries and thesauruses while they are reading at home with their child. In addition, they will introduce families to Wordly Wise, a school-wide initiative to enhance vocabulary development for all. March 12, 2019 from 2:35 - 3:15 Topic 4: Introduction to NYSESLAT Expectations Rationale: Parents will be informed of the four modalities that their child will be tested with, as well as showing examples of what will be expected of them to do. Parents will be provided with individualized strategies that will help the students achieve success. May 14, 2019 from 2:35 - 3:15 Topic 5: Reading Success/Preparing for the summer Rationale: Parents will be given strategies to promote reading and writing skills. The latest research found in Second Language Acquisition to help students success in reading, writing, speaking and listening. A summer packet will be given out with parent resources. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session $6,617.16 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction2 mornings a week for grades 1-2 and 2 mornings a week for grades 3-5. Each session is 1 hour. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 0 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $153.78 $219.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) $325.00 Travel Other 0 $480.01 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2 teachers @ $50.13 per hour 33 weeks - 4 sessions per week (2 sessions for each teacher) Nothing was purchased Teaching Resource: Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills by Nonie Lesaux, etc. 6 copies at $25.63 Teacher Resource: 6 copies of the text Reading Strategies by Jennifer Serravallo will be given to each ENL collaborative classroom teacher 6x$36.50=219.00 Brain POP and Brain POP Junior $175.00 per class + Brain Pop ELL @$150.00 per class = $325.00 for the 2018-2019 school year (September to June) Not applicable Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 46 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Parent Involvement (at no cost - sessions provided during parent engagement time) Parent Training/Engagement - one hour per month: 2 teachers @$48.01 x 8 = $384.08 x 2=$768.16 $30 for refreshment for each session (30 x 8) Notebooks for 40 students @ $1.28 per book (SHOP DOE) Folders = $19.67 (box of 25) x 6 (SHOP DOE) Leveled Readers Little Leveled Readers Leveled Readers Grade 1 Tote bags ($4.83 x 22 = $106.26) On Your Way To English On-line Site Access for all ENL classes on each grade. Total $768.16 $240.00 $51.20 $118.02 $434.60 $19.30 $1,097.98 $106.26 $2,117.00 TOTAL $12,747.47 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name Katherine R. Snyder School Borough Brooklyn School Number 222 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Theresa Olivieri Coach Jennifer Crowley ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Theresa Connolly Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Jordan/IEP Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Vincent DiPalermo/SETSS Related-Service Provider Pietra Mavrides Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Kathleen Snow Coach Kim McCorkell School Counselor Christina Indart Parent Kimberly Rios Parent Coordinator Chris O'Neill Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 48  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 939 Total number of ELLs 102 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.86% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 222 utilizes The Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (F&P) to evaluate early literacy skills. It links assessment with instruction along The Continuum of Literacy Learning. It is a comprehensive system comprised of one-on-one assessment aligned to the students' instructional and independent reading abilities to the F&P Text Level Gradient. The results of our June 2018 data for our ENL's indicates the following: Out of the 32 Kindergarten students: two mastered level I, one mastered level H, two mastered level G, 1 mastered Level F, 1 mastered Level E, eleven mastered Level D. Level D is the target reading level exiting Kindergarten. Eight students were approaching grade level by mastering Level C. Three students are currently reading on a Level B while another two are currently reading on a Level A. Out of the 19 first grade students, two students mastered Level K, five students mastered Level J, two mastered Level I. Level I 2018-19 CEP 49  is the targeted reading level for first grade. Two mastered Level H, one mastered Level F, one mastered Level E, two mastered Level D, one mastered Level C. We enrolled 2 new arrivals whose Levels are A/B. All students who did not reach Level I will receive targeted instruction. Out of the 17 second grade students, five students mastered above the target Level L, two mastered Level N, three mastered Level M, three students mastered Level L, Three students mastered Level K and two students mastered Level J. Two students are on a Level K and two students are on a Level J. Two students are on a Level G and two other students are on a Level E. These students will receive targeted instruction. Out of our 16 third grade students, one mastered Level R, one mastered Level Q, four mastered Level P, two mastered Level N, 3 mastered Level M, one mastered Level O. We have two new admits reading on a Level B and D. One mastered Level D. These students will receive targeted instruction. Out of our 10 fourth grade students, one student mastered a Level V, one mastered Level S, one mastered Level R, three mastered Level Q, one mastered Level N, and one mastered a Level L. The data reflects a varying degree of mastery within the grade level. This data will determine our action plan. More support will be offered to these students during the school day as well as morning and afternoon programs. Our action plan includes formalized systems to provide differentiation within each lesson of every literacy and math unit. For example, teachers might offer a color coded system to differentiate types of words, present materials on tape or provide visual cues to foster success. Furthermore, analyzing data as a school suggests we should target second grade for intentional foundational instruction. As a school, we are committed to our ENL population. P.S. 222 has a Vertical Literacy Team and Vertical Math Team comprised of teachers and specialists. This team devotes time and specific meetings to the ENL population and successful strategies to promote these learners. For example, as a result of this team, teachers devoted a portion of their lesson planning for ENLs and providing ENL support. Throughout the year, teachers share best practices that support this subgroup. Analysis showed a weakness in Kindergarten performance. Also, we noted a significant decline in progress in the 3rd and 4th grade. Therefore, this will guide our decision making progress. We have an additional TESOL teacher who will provide targeted instruction to this population of students using the integrated model. P.S. 222 continually monitors ENL student progress through formal and informal assessments, and systematically adjusts instruction based on a variety of evidence and data. Ms. Connolly and Ms. Mavrides, our ENL teachers have implemented Rigby’s “On Our Way to English” standardized testing preparation assessments across grades K -5. This leveled series of assessments provide a preview of grade appropriate expectations that the ELL students will encounter while taking a standardized test. While introducing the test-taking process to the younger students, it at the same time provides practice for the older students within a variety of genres. Building on modeled instruction, students will explore different types of questions, take part in pre-reading and pre-writing exercises, be instructed on the use of self-check rubrics and benefit from research-based test taking tips and strategies. On an individual basis, Ms. Connolly and Ms. Mavrides administer the Rigby ELL Assessment in which the four domains of Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing are assessed. Results of this screening, informs our ESL teachers of the student’s language stage and literacy level. This information drives placement as well as instruction, as the English Language Learner progresses on to the next Language Stage and towards on-grade level reading and writing proficiency. The student’s progress is tracked with the Portfolio of Student Progress and the Data Management Tool. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures have been designed to monitor, evaluate and revise our efforts to meet the needs of this subgroup. Our Language Acquisition Team supports our action plan for these learners. This team meets once a month to review data, instruction and lesson planning. In addition, this team uses an inquiry focus to improve student achievement. Results reflected a need to improve the progress of our Kindergarten students; therefore this will be a focus for inquiry among the team. The team reviews best practices for ENL learners and the optimal ways to integrate On Our Way to English. Then these practices are shared with our school community during professional development opportunities. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program by monitoring, analyzing and revising our instruction according to data. We ask ourselves - who are our incoming students? What needs do they have? How can we meet their needs? We look for patterns 2018-19 CEP 50  and for exceptions to those patterns. Currently we are using the RLAT and the RELC to access the ENL students performance. We look at the history of each student's proficiency levels, documenting the growth and addressing the lags. If we see that Listening or Writing is lacking, then we plan instruction to address that concern. As a school will utilize the ENL Baseline Periodic Assessment for students in K through 5. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures have been designed to monitor, evaluate and revise our efforts to meet the needs of this subgroup through the use of interventions. Our ELL Team supports our action plan for these learners. This team meets once a month to review data, instruction and lesson planning. In addition, this team reports to the Instructional Lead Team. Best practices and research-based interventions are reviewed and documented. The Instructional Lead Team disseminates this information to the Vertical Teams who then report to the horizontal teams on each grade. In addition, intervention services will be provided through our Academic Intervention Support groups and Title III morning and afternoon programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We incorporate multi-tiered approach to target at-risk students and provide support services. The RTI process begins with high-quality instruction and universal screening of students such as the Rigby Assessment. These findings are shared with the classroom teacher. Struggling learners are provided with interventions in the classroom with increasing levels of intensity. These services may be provided by a variety of personnel, including general education teachers, special educators, and specialists. Progress is closely monitored by tracking results within a portfolio. Further decisions about the concentration and duration of these interventions are based on individual student response to instruction. If needed, additional support is provided through Academic Intervention Services for instance, pull-out or push-in with a small group, before school academic programs and extended day. Data indicated a need to improve writing skills. Through the writing process, sustained and extended writing pieces are developed, first modeled by the teacher and then expected from the students. Using the RTI as a guide, students are provided with scaffolded instruction to facilitate success. Since our goal is to improve the students’ writing skills, quality writing instruction is implemented. We incorporate a variety of writing tools in the classroom and the students are exposed to different genres, purposes and formats. The development of writing is modeled through each step of the process. This year our literacy curriculum maps include reading and writing. In addition, personal word wall references and self check rubrics are used by the students to encourage high quality independent writing. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Forty-Six new admits were identified as English Language Learners based on their NYSITELL 2017-2018 scores. Eighteen tested in the proficiency level of “Entering”, four in “Emerging”, twelve in “Transitioning” and twelve in the “Expanding” proficiency level, and eight in the "Commanding" proficiency level. *Information Below will be updated upon receiving the 2018 NYSESLAT scores in September Of these new admits, six were new arrivals to the United States, first time entrants in the New York City School system, ranging in grades kindergarten through the fifth grade. Our review of the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT scores revealed the following: 3 students went from Entering to Emerging; 1 student went from Emerging to Expanding; 2 students went from Expanding to Transitioning; 3 students went from Emerging to Transitioning; 2 students went from Entering to Expanding; 9 students went from Transitioning to Expanding; and 3 students went from Entering to Transitioning. Four of our students became first year FELLS and 1 student moved from first-year FELL to second-year FELL. We are extremely proud of all of our students and look forward to monitoring and observing their progress. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Structures have been designed to monitor, evaluate, revise and disseminate our action plan to meet the needs of this subgroup through the use of interventions. Our LA (Language Acquisition) Team supports our action plan for these learners. This team meets once a month to review data, instruction and lesson planning. In addition, this team reports to the Instructional Lead Team. Best practices and research-based interventions are reviewed and documented. The Instructional Lead Team disseminates this information to the Vertical Teams who then report to the horizontal teams on each grade. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 222 has a Freestanding English as a Second Language Program in grades Kindergarten through Fifth Grade. Instruction is delivered in a Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL model and is conducted by a dually certified TESOL teacher and a Common Branch and a bilingual certified teacher. Groups are formed heterogeneously with mixed proficiency levels in the same group. The TESOL teachers collaborate with grade teachers on curriculum and instruction utilizing the push in classroom model. In addition, the TESOL teachers attend grade level meetings so that they can align and support the instruction for our ELL students. At these grade meetings, the classroom teachers are given the opportunity to discuss their ELL concerns and the teachers share their exemplar teaching techniques with one another. The TESOL teachers are there to offer their support and expertise. The school organizes and structures staff development sessions to provide time for collaboration and planning. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154, all ENLs and FELLs receive ENL services based on their NYSESLAT or NYSITELL proficiency level. The ENL teachers and a school administrator have scheduled blocks of time in the ENL program schedule to ensure that all ENLs receive their mandates. All ENLs and FELLs will receive the units of study mandated by the new CR Part 154 regulations. Instruction is delivered in the following manner: There are five proficiency levels, we ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided for each student in each program model. Our Beginning or Entering Students receive 2 units or 360 minutes of ESL/ENL instruction; 180 minutes of Standalone ESL/ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ESL/ENL. Our Low Intermediate/Emerging students also receive 2 units or 360 minutes of ESL/ENL instruction; 90 minutes of Standalone, 180 minutes of Integrated and 90 minutes of Flexible instruction (Standalone or Integrated). Our Intermediate/Transitioning students receive 1 unit of ESL/ENL instruction or 180 minutes; 90 minutes of Integrated and 90 minutes of Flexible. The Advance/Expanding students receive 1 unit of ESL/ENL 180 minutes of Integrated instruction. Our Proficient/Commanding (1st year FELLs) students receive .05 unit of ESL/ENL instruction or 90 minutes of integrated instruction. Finally, the students who scored Proficient/Commanding on the previous year's NYSESLAT (our 2nd year FELLs) also receive .05 unit of ENL or 90 minutes of ESL/ENL integrated instruction per week. In accordance to the mandates our FELLs will receive continued support for two years following their proficiency year; support in the 90 minute integrated instruction and in receiving testing accommodations (separate location/time and a half.) Our ENLs and FELLs are invited to attend our Title III after school programs. Ms. Connolly, our dually certified, Common Branch and TESOL teacher and Mrs. Mavrides, our bilingual teacher ensure that mandated services are delivered per CR Part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 52  Content area instruction is provided in English while using ESL methodology and instructional strategies, including TPR, alternate text sets, vocabulary development, the To-With-By Approach. Scaffolding is provided while addressing and teaching within the Common Core Instructional Framework. Instruction is aligned to the New York State ENL Standards; students will listen, speak, read and write in English for information and understanding, for literary response, enjoyment and expression, for critical analysis and evaluation, for classroom and social interaction and will demonstrate cross-cultural knowledge and understanding. All lessons taught and presented are under the Learning Standards of the Common Core. We revised our math instruction to reflect the With-By-To Method. This revision allowed for exploration and formative assessment in the beginning of instruction. This universal entry point allowed teachers to provide needed interventions throughout the entire lesson. Alongside content instruction, we weave the attributes of Academic and Social Behavior found within “The Habits of Mind”. Teachers closely align instruction and adhere to all mandates directed by the NCLB requirements. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teachers and testing coordinator work closely together to ensure that students are evaluated with the appropriate testing modifications. Whenever possible, we use bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals to translate content area school assessments. When available, we provide translated editions for the New York State Mathematics and New York State Science examinations. If a translated edition of the exam is not available, we will make every attempt to find a pedagogue to translate the exam for the student. In addition, when a Spanish speaking students is assessed with the NYSITELL and the child shows entitlement for ENL services, he or she is then administered the Spanish LAB. This assessment will indicate to us if the child is literate in Spanish. The results would determine the child's proficiency level in their first language. Instructional supports can be put into place; bilingual dictionaries, glossaries text and workbooks when available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. In the event we determine through an interview that a student has had interrupted or inconsistent education P.S. 222 developed an instructional plan for SIFES. In the event we determine that a new student has had interrupted education, and is two years below grade level, we plan accordingly for the student. Besides receiving their mandated services, he or she would be invited to our Title III program and our Extended Day program. The student would be assessed and provided with Academic Intervention Services that match their needs. The classroom teacher, cluster teachers and ENL teacher would provide differentiated support, depending on the student’s needs. 6b. P.S. 222 has developed an instructional plan for newcomer ENLs: For newcomer ENLs and ENLs in the U.S. schools for less than three years, we provide ENL services based on CR 154 regulations. In addition, these students receive Academic Intervention Services as necessary. Newcomer ENL students are also invited to attend our ENL morning/afterschool program. The classroom teacher, cluster teachers, and ENL Teacher would provide differentiated support, depending on the students’ need. 6c: P.S. 222 has developed an instructional plan for students who are ENLs for four-six years: Long term ELLS receive mandated ENL services and are invited to attend our ENL morning program. They are also provided Academic Intervention Services, as appropriate. The classroom teacher, cluster teachers and ENL Teacher would provide differentiated support, depending on the students’ need. 6d: P.S. 222 has developed an instructional plan for students who are long term ENLs: these are the students who do not attain proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT after 6 years of services. These students receive mandated ENL services and are invited to attend our ENL morning program and extended day. They are also provided Academic Intervention Services, as appropriate. The classroom teacher, cluster teachers, and ENL teacher would provide differentiated support, depending on the students' need. The Student Support Team would meet to discuss the students' lack of progress and create an individualized plan of action that will match the students with an appropriate Tier II or III intervention. 6e. P.S.222 has developed an instructional plan for former ENLs (FELLs). Our FELLS will receive 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction. The FELLs are also given testing accommodations, receiving time/half and separate location on state examinations for the 1st and 2nd years after testing proficient. The FELL students are monitored closely during this transition period and are 2018-19 CEP 53  invited to our Title III morning program, if need be. The classroom teacher, cluster teachers and ENL teacher would provide differentiated support, depending on the students’ need. P.S. 222 provides continued transitional support for students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT. This support is provided by the classroom teachers through Tier 1 intervention. If needed, additional support is provided through Academic Intervention Services, before school academic programs, extended day, and related services. These former ENLS (FELLs) will continue to receive testing accommodations on assessments for up to two years after attaining proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENLs with disabilities are provided ENL services as per CR 154 regulations. Materials and methodologies are adapted to meet the specific needs of these students and to meet their IEP goals. For example, we will use tactile materials, Leap Frog, Big Books, and alternate text sets. In addition, we integrate technology through the use of Earobics, Headsprout, Rosetta Stone, and iReady. The teachers of ENLs with disabilities use the Spire Reading program and Fundations to promote literacy skills. Typical lesson planning involves interventions and techniques for ENL students. Teachers have included color coding systems, visual supports and systems for vocabulary development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 222 uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of our ELLs with disabilities. We provide instruction within the least restrictive environment. In addition, we have both heterogeneous and homogeneous grouping, depending on the needs of the students. The ENL program schedule was created with care to ensure that ENLs with disabilities are able to receive their ESL mandates in addition to their IEP mandated therapies. In addition, these students are discussed during our SIT (Student Implementation Team) meetings for further review. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 222 offers targeted intervention programs for ENLS in Mathematics, ELA, and Science. These interventions are taught in English, with native language supports. We offer a morning mathematics support program for ELLs in Grades 3-5. This program meets two times per week for 1 hour each day. In addition, selected ENLs will receive Academic Intervention Services in mathematics and ELA. Our Science Teachers provide additional support to fourth grade ENLs during their administration period to review for the New York State Science Examination. We offer a variety of intervention services that are research based. These include Fundations, and Great Leaps. We use technology programs such as Headsprout, iReady, and Rosetta Stone to support and enhance learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are continuing to develop our initiative to develop curriculum based on the Common Core Learning Standards and Social Studies. Collectively teachers are working across the grades on vertical teams to develop lessons that answer directly to challenges that students encountered. Our expectations are high as we dive into providing rigorous, yet supportive instruction. Tapping into the "Habits of Mind" and highlighting the "Academic and Personal Behaviors" of Persistence, Engagement, Work Habits and Organizational Skills, along with Communication, Collaboration Skills and Self-Regulation, aid in our student achievement; all students: mainstream, SWDs, ENLs and FELLs benefit from these initiatives. In addition, we will continue our work with enhancing mathematical knowledge. This year we revised our workshop model to mirror time for exploration and reasoning. Also, we introduced new techniques that offered a universal entry point for all students. For example, we introduced the 3-Read and the Notice and Wondering strategies. These strategies were particularly beneficial for ENL students. For example, the Notice and Wonder strategy relies on mathematical reasoning as opposed to a word problem that requires proficient reading skills. On the other hand, the 3-Read incorporates close reading to support this subgroup. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program. 2018-19 CEP 54  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all specialized services and programs. Notices about these services are sent home in the parents’ native language. Many of our ELLs are members of our chorus, school band, art club, and student council. In addition, ELLs have equal opportunity to participate in our Story-Telling Contest, Color Guard, community based writing contests, and school plays and concerts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have many instructional materials to support our ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and thesaurus’ are available for student use. In addition, our ENL teachers have a wealth of trade books that reflect the many cultures from around the world and non-fiction texts to support content area instruction. Grade level content is supported through alternate text sets, which provide social studies and science grade level content on the students' reading levels. The ENL room is a print rich environment that is filled with authentic charts and labels. We utilize technology to support our ELLs by implementing myOn, iReady and Rosetta Stone, Ipads as well as online access to On Our Way To English. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided through the use of glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, and technology programs. We distributed Apple ipads to the ELL s who are literate in their first language so that they can easily access translation services that will translate unknown words or phrases for them. The students use the ipads in their classroom and carry their ipad to the Science lab, library or ENL class. We purchased the Spanish Edition Go Math Mathematics textbook for our Spanish speaking students. In the classroom, students use on-line bilingual translators to assist with oral and written communication. In addition, we assign bilingual paraprofessionals to support ENL students in the classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ALL ELLs and FELLs receive the required service supports in accordance with the newly revised CR Part 154 mandates. Students are grouped for ENL instruction, with other students who are in the same or contiguous grades. In addition, we have purchased high interest/low readability texts for those upper grade ELL students who are at a lower reading level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have many instructional materials to support our ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and thesaurus’ are available for student use. In addition, our ENL teachers have a wealth of trade books that reflect the many cultures from around the world and non-fiction texts to support content area instruction. Grade level content is supported through alternate text sets, which provide social studies and science grade level content on the students' reading levels. The ENL room is a print rich environment that is filled with authentic charts and labels. We utilize technology to support our ELLs by implementing myOn, iReady, and Rosetta Stone. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled students receive a welcome letter from the principal prior to the beginning of the school year. It outlines the school routines, hours and schedules. In addition, we mail out a supply list so that families can purchase supplies when it is most convenient for them. During registration, if a parent requests translation services, these materials will be sent in the home language. DOE bilingual welcome booklets are distributed to the parents at time of registration. In addition, we created a Welcome Team; this team takes a tour with the new student and answers questions. This former ELL (FELL) serves as a student ambassador, the Ambassador of Kindness. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, we do not offer language electives for any student at P.S. 222 2018-19 CEP 55  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for our ELL teachers and for our entire staff is a priority. We include all teachers in the PD of ENL Strategies and Practices. Our ENL teachers have attended and will continue to attend a number of workshops throughout the year such as monthly Ambassador meetings and the Advanced Literacy Institute. It is their responsibility to turnkey the information that they receive to the general staff. Our ENL teachers will present a number of presentations at our monthly faculty conferences, write contributions in the faculty notes, and work with our paraprofessionals to ensure cohesion. They will attend workshops that target language acquisition and best practices. We make certain that all teachers benefit from the resources they receive and the information they have learned because we realize that any time a teacher could receive a newly admitted ELL. We also make certain to provide this support because there are Former English Language Learners in every class and they too can benefit from the strategies that are shared. Our ENL teachers presented a workshop this past November on Election Day to our cluster teachers entitled, "Supporting our ELLs/Native Language Support." Our ENL teachers are also members of P.S. 222's Literacy Leadership Vertical Team. This team meets weekly and serves as a cohesive thread across the grades as they determine the overall direction that the school is taking, while addressing the particular challenges that each grade may be experiencing. They are given the opportunity to take part in the discussion and the sharing of best practices. They contribute their knowledge on the social and academic development of an English Language Learner and on scaffolding instruction for English Language Learners. The ENL Teachers, classroom teachers, and cluster teachers continue to receive school based professional development in the areas that have been identified as high priority. For example, they participate in professional development on differentiating instruction, questioning that promotes higher order thinking, and building word attack skills, and authentic discussions that build both conversational and academic language and knowledge. This year, there is an emphasis on aligning all instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards, while incorporating the "Habits of Mind" and "Academic and Personal Behaviors" into our daily instruction. Our TESOL teachers are taking part in a series of PDs offered by the Brooklyn South BFSC entitled "Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills" and monthly Ambassador meetings that focus on "How Languages are Learned" by Lightbon and Spada. The workshops will assist in meeting compliance issues as well as offering instructional strategies. The Advanced Literacy Workshop focused on techniques to support our ENL students. These techniques helped establish a common set of instructional practices in all classrooms, what we refer to as the Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy. In turn, the TESOL teachers will address the staff with internal professional workshops. In addition, this year, we have an ENL Inquiry Team. Teachers of ELLs in Grades 3-5 will meet monthly with the school administration and the ENL teachers. Together we will analyze the progress of our ELLs, identify trends and academic needs. The team will conduct research on best practices for supporting our ELLS. Our ENL teachers are joining grade meetings each week during our staff development period. They are rotating through the grades each week to assure collaboration across school-wide. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 56  Staff members are provided supports as they transition ELLs from one grade level to the other. This support is provided through conferences with the ENL Teachers, administrators and/or network support. Teachers also work closely with the Parent Coordinator and SBST members, as they support ELL students through the middle school application process. In addition, classroom teachers are given time at the beginning of the year to confer with each other about ELL students. The required professional development hours are provided through Faculty Conferences, Professional Development days, pre and post observation conferences, Inquiry Teams as well as after school professional learning opportunities to collaborate and plan effective instruction for our ENL students. We will offer targeted professional development dedicated to language acquisition; furthermore, we will focus on best practices for integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. Handouts, agendas, faculty notes and attendance sheets are maintained in our professional development binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Communication between our school and our ENL parents is very important to the success of our program. In order to provide parents with an opportunity for discussion throughout the year, we will ensure an annual individual meeting as well as daily meetings to provide updates on students progress. These meetings will take place between October and March; these meetings will target language development, assessment results, and goals across all content areas. We will send a translated invitation to all ENL parents with a choice of three dates for their annual individual. If needed, we will provide interpretation services, as requested. Our record keeping plan will include a tear-off form with the aforementioned translated information. By having this tear-off we will ensure that all parents will be scheduled for their appointment. Furthermore, these appointments will be logged in a parent connections notebook, retained by the ENL teachers. There will be sign-in sheets and a copy of the discussed agenda and individualized progress reports for each student retained also by the ENL teacher. A follow-up phone call will be made for anyone who does not return their tear-off. Translated documentation offered through the City's Unit of Translation and Interpretation will be employed by our school and sent to the parents to encourage engagement and involvement. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent support and involvement are an integral part of all academic and social endeavors at P.S 222. Orientations are held within the first ten days of enrollment and on-going orientations are held year long as warranted by our new admit registrations. In-house translators are present at all orientations and reach-out events. We have continued to implement a parent-conference block on our Tuesday afternoon engagement time slot. The parents are invited to come in for workshops held during this block and the time is also used for phone-conferences and face-to-face individual meetings and needs and concerns they may have. A parent engagement log is kept by the ENL teachers. In 2017, orientations were held in early September. We were able to reach out to the parents of the students who were tested with the NYSITELL last spring, giving us a jump on the orientation meetings. Other meetings were held at the end of September. Along with presenting the three models of ENL instruction available on the Parent Survey and Program Choice Form, these meetings also touched upon educating the parents on the varied DOE bilingual resources available to them on the DOE website and on the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. In October, Ms. Mavrides and Ms. Connolly followed up with other encounters. Monthly workshops were scheduled for the Tuesday afternoon blocks. The ENL/TESOL teachers surveyed the ENL parents (using translated documents) to inquire about the needs and wants of our ENL parents. We used the feedback from our surveys to schedule parent professional development that was tailored to meet the needs of our ENL parents. Our workshops included Successful Reading Strategies, Academic Vocabulary, aiding parents in navigating through the DOE system, Preparing for Parent Teacher Conferences, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL information, and preparing for the summer. We will continue to survey our ENL parents in the future and the outcome will be presented and discussed with the administration and workshops will be planned accordingly. The ELL parents are invited to participate in all activities held by our parent association. Notices are sent home in translated copies to encourage their participation. The ELL parents are informed of the Parent Engagement Workshops and activities that are held city-wide. This year, our Multicultural Festival motivated many ENL parents to showcase 2018-19 CEP 57  their culture and diversity by sharing food, music, dances and art work. Due to the success and collaboration of this event, the Multicultural Committee will continue to plan activities that engage the school community. Templates for school holidays, parent-teacher conferences and other events provided by the DOE are disseminated to the parents to maximize parent involvement and engagement. The DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit's multi-lingual signage is seen around the school and displayed in the main office. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P.S. 222's leadership and teachers have a clear vision for their ELL students; ultimately high expectations that are supported by a purposeful plan. We expect high level performances from our ELLs that align to grade level standards. We impart in our students a responsibility and desire to be role-model citizens of our school, of our community, of our city and of the greater world. Our school has developed and practiced a "Respect and Kindness" policy that underlies the temperament and flow of every school day. Compliments are noted on a "golden slip" and announced weekly by our administrators. Compliments can come from classroom teachers, from the school faculty, from the administrators themselves, but most importantly from student to student. Over the past three years, a genuine and meaningful policy has fallen into place. The students look forward to hearing their names and their classmates' names announced over the public announcement system. Often it is a name of a classmate who has helped or guided a new arrival into our building. We are proud of our school community and of the support provided to our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Theresa Olivieri, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 222 School DBN: 22K222 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Theresa Olivieri Title Principal Kathleen Snow Assistant Principal Christina O'Neill Parent Coordinator Theresa Connolly ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kim Rios Parent Lisa Jordan/IEP Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Vincent DiPalermo/SETSS Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Crowley Kim McCorkell Coach Coach Christina Indart School Counselor n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Tara E. Hanley Other Assistant Principal Pietra Mavrides Other ENL Teacher n/a Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 n/a n/a 06/26/2018 06/26/2018 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K222 School Name: 222 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Theresa Pietra Connolly Mavrides TESOL TESOL No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The parents of P.S. 222 whose language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in their child’s education. In addition, the parents have access to programs and services that are critical to their education. Procedures set by the Department of Education are followed to ensure that this access is provided. P.S. 222 gathers information on the parents' preferred language of communication from the emergency card and in ATS. Pertinent data is obtained through a number of ATS reports. The RAPL “The Adult Preferred Language Report” provides us with the name of the parents and the preferred spoken and written language of the parent. These preferences are pulled from Part III of the HLIS “The Home Language Identification Survey”. Questions 1 and 2 respectively; “In what language would you like to receive written information from the school?” and “In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff?”. Given at the time, the parents also fill out the “Emergency Contact Cart” or blue card. On this card, the parents are asked to indicate their preference of communication both written and oral. This question is asked twice, for the mother and father’s 2018-19 CEP 61  and/or guardian's preference. This is the data that will appear on the aforementioned RAPL. These are the procedures we have in place that ensure important documents are translated and sent home. Initially upon entering the building, parents are greeted with the multilingual “Welcome” poster supplied by the “Translation & Interpretation Unit”. The school has posted multilingual signage notifying parents of the availability of language services. Our security guards are also equipped with a language identification card. The Translation & Interpretation Unit's Language ID card is displayed in the office and is shown to parents who may need language assistance. If necessary an interpreter will be called. All efforts are exercised to make the parents feel welcomed and informed. Upon meeting the parents during registration, an interview is given by a culturally aware trained pedagogue with the parent and the child. This interview along with the completion of the Home Language Survey will determine the home language. If a translator is necessary and we have one on staff, we call for assistance. On staff at P.S. 222, we have a number of bilingual personnel who we call upon if the parent needs assistance through the registration process. We are able to provide interpretation services during school hours. These are the same bilingual speakers who attend the Parent Orientation meetings, who are available during parent teacher conferences, and who are present at parent engagement meetings when necessary. Currently we have four Spanish speakers, one Russian speakers, three Haitian Creole speakers, one Urdu speaker and one Italian speaker. A copy of "In-House Translators" is kept in the main office, at the security desk, in the nurse’s office, in the School Base Support Team's office, in the ENL room, and in the Assistant Principals’ office. If we don't have a translator on site and we need assistance, we call the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit for assistance. The parents are given the newly revised HLIS. We make every effort to give the parent the bilingual form in their preferred language. If by chance their native language is a low incidence language, and their preferred language is not available, the parent will fill out an English form and indicate their home language where indicated. On the second page of the HLIS form, the parent answers the very two last questions; “In what language would you like to receive written information from the school?” and “In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff?” The HLIS forms are carefully reviewed to record all requests for translation services or bilingual materials. The names of the parents who request translation are added to the list from the previous year. This master list is kept in the main office. By maintaining this list and adhering to the Chancellor’s Regulations for providing translation and interpretation services to our parents, we are assured that our parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. Informal surveys are given to determine parents' preference of communication as we prepare for parent teacher conferences. Parents are given the opportunity to request a translator to be present during their conferences. If a requested language is not available, teachers will use the telephone translation services available through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. When we have parent engagement meetings we canvas the invites for translation requests. If need be, translators are called in to assist. These in-house translators are always present during ELL Orientation meetings and ELL parent engagement sessions. At the time of graduation, parents are asked if they would like an interpreter present for the graduation ceremony. The hired interpreter translates into a transmitter and the parent tunes into a channel on their headphone. In this way, limited English speaking parents become active participants in their child's graduation. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish 31 3.52 28 3.18 2018-19 CEP 62  English Russian Chinese Urdu Arabic Haitian Creole Kazakistan Vietnamese 726 21 50 7 3 2 1 1 2.53 5.37 5.49 0.8 0.34 0.23 0.11 0.11 726 21 51 7 3 2 1 1 2.53 5.37 5.49 0.8 0.34 0.23 0.11 0.11 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families List of translated documents typically disseminated by the school: June/August "Welcome to a New School Year" letter - including school procedures; dismissal times, lunch times, academic expectations, dress code. Annual handbooks Newsletters Calendars Letters from the Principal How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services 2018-19 CEP 63  Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements Report Card Comments Before/After school program invitations ELL Family Resources that include: Parents' Preferred Language Forms, The Home Language Identification Surveys, ELL Parent Brochures, Parent Survey & Program Selection Form Parent Notifications: Entitlement Letter, Continued Entitlement Letter, Non Entitlement Letter, Placement Letters, Transition Letter Title III invitations Monthly November March New York State testing dates Notification of Special Events September Available upon request: Bilingual glossaries of DOE terminology and special education terms and definitions Invitation to join "Family Access" with our parent coordinator, Chris O'Neill September When applicable Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services 2018-19 CEP 64  When applicable September/February Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services 2018-19 CEP 65  A general school supply list that can be adapted by the grade leader or classroom teacher. June/August Upon request Stranger alert or other highly sensitive alert letters to be disseminated. When applicable Letters generated by the DOE to be distributed to the student body. For instance, this past year we sent out letters from the Health Commissioner on medical alerts. When applicable Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services Use of staff who speak the language, over the phone translation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Informal interview at time of registration to determine language preference of limited English parents Translators present as needed at Annual IEP meetings ELL Parent Engagement Meetings: translators present as requested or needed Parent Association Functions: translators present as requested or needed June August September Ongoing throughout the year Translators present at time of "Family Access" set-up with parent coordinator, as requested or needed Parent-Teacher Conferences November ELL Parent Orientations: Translator present as needed, held within first ten days of registration Grade overviews: Translators present as needed, held within the second week of school Translators present as needed, to be held on September 17th, November 2018-19 CEP 66  March 14th and 15th, March 13th and 14th and May 15th of 2018/2019 school year. A list is compiled prior to the date and translators are assigned. times to be determined and/or at the request of the parent and/or teacher Translators present as requested or needed Translators present as requested or needed Parent Engagement Sessions: State Testing Overviews, translators present as request or needed November January Meetings requested by administration and/or guidance counselor February 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our strategy includes a school-wide communication system such as Messenger/Remind. In our BRT travel bag is a list of ENL students with emergency contact information. We will use over the phone DOE translation services to contact families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 requires that the DOE provide interpretation services, either at the school/office where the parent is seeking assistance or by telephone, to the maximum extent practicable, during regular business hours to parents whose primary language is a covered language and who request such services in order to communicate with the DOE regarding critical information about their child’s education. Over-the-phone interpretation services are available to our school during regular business hours in over 150 languages. These services can be accessed by contacting the main office or a staff member. Language identification is done by either: Our TESOL, Mrs. Connolly identifying the language The limited English proficient parent identifying their language from a Language Identification Card The vendor identifying the language with the use of specialized linguists over the phone Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 requires that documents produced by central DOE offices and schools which contain critical information regarding a child’s education must be translated into the covered languages. Documents containing critical information that are translated include, but are not limited to, the following areas: Registration, application and selection 2018-19 CEP 67  Standards and performance Conduct and discipline Safety and health Special education and related services Entitlement to public education or placement in any special education, English language learner or non-standard academic program Transfer and discharge Legal or disciplinary matters The T & I Unit is responsible for translating the majority of these documents into the covered languages. Translations into non-covered languages are obtained from qualified contracted vendors. Our translators are aided by translation tools, such as translation memory software, bilingual glossaries of DOE terminology, and foreign-language style guides. These regulations will be disseminated and discussed during our first team meeting with the entire staff in September. Ms. Connolly and Mrs. Mavrides will host a workshop in September to delve deeper into the demands of the regulation. There are numerous resources that will aid in this endeavor. For example, we have many staff members that are bi and tri-lingual and they serve as a resource for our ELL parents and teachers. In addition, our DOE email system offers a translation feature which can be utilized to aid these families. We will also use translation funds to elicit the use of Big Word to translate any additional notifications for families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school fully complies with Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 in regards to translation and interpretation services. We fulfill our requirements as per Section VII by displaying the signage supplied by the unit and distributing the material provided and informing the parents of their rights in regards to Regulation A-663. The multi-language "Hello" poster is displayed by the entrance of the school. The Language ID Guide is utilized at the security desk and main office. "The Language Palm Cards" are available for the parents to use to convey their language of preferred communication. The staff utilizes and promotes the services that are provided by T&I unit. Immediately upon registration, the parent’s preferred language is determined and noted. This information is shared with the classroom teachers and the school will comply with the wishes of the parent in regard to written and oral communication. The parents will be given a copy, in their preferred language if available, of the Parents’ Guide to Language Access and the Parents’ Bill of Rights at the time of registration, Here at P.S. 222, the staff is committed to deliver translation and interpretation services to the parents throughout the child’s educational experience. Beginning at registration and extending through student graduation. It is our intent to support our limited-English speaking parents in every effort so that they may partake in a shared parent-school experience. Limited-English-proficient speaking parents are invited to our school events as well as to city-wide events. Translated notifications are sent home with the students and special notices are included in our school’s newsletters. The school’s calendar and newsletter is available online and can be translated online with a click of a button. Parents are informed of these 2018-19 CEP 68  resources at the time of Parent Orientation. It is our intent to provide a meaningful opportunity for each parent to participate in and have full access to all programs and services critical to their child’s education. The list of parents who prefer a language other than English to be their language of communication is kept on file in the main office and is updated as necessary. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? To ensure the quality of our language services, P.S. 222 will maintain open communication with our limited-English speaking parents. At the beginning of the school year, school generated surveys were distributed by the classroom teachers. Additional surveys are distributed at our PA meetings and at our parent-teacher conferences (November 2015 and March 2016). The "School Survey for Parents" generated from the offices of T&I unit will be distributed to the limited-English speaking parents mid-year. Our ENL teacher will review the results of these surveys to address the feedback received from the parents so that the school can be assured of the quality and availability of the services. 2018-19 CEP 69 
