2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 21K226 School Name: P.S. 226 ALFRED DE B.MASON Principal: EVAN KLEIN 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Alfred De B. Mason 332100010226 PK-8 School Number (DBN): 21K226 6006 23 Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11204 718-234-4940 Phone Number: 718-234-4945 Fax: Evan Klein eklein9@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Evan Klein Deborah Navarro Maggie Tang JustinGreene Sara Bernhard n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Isabel DiMola Superintendent: 1401 Emmons Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11235 IDimola@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-648-0209 Phone Number: 718-648-2165 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South MauriciereDeGovia FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 th StreetBrooklyn, NY 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4862 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Evan Klein Deborah Navarro Maggie Tang N/A Sara Bernhard N/A N/A N/A Patricia Agliata Brenda Morales VincenzaPizzo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sonia Kelley MuhamedHadzovic Melissa Braun Jason Tagarelli Justin Greene Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/PTA Treasurer Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school mission statement is: Section 4: CEP Overview The members of P.S./I.S. 226 community are passionate about empowering students to achieve their fullest academic, social, and emotional potential. Through rigorous, data-driven instruction, we are committed to providing a nurturing learning environment to ensure that all of our students are challenged and engaged. Promoting high 2018-19 CEP 9  standards and expectations, teachers, administrators, families, and the community equally share the responsibility for advancing the school's mission. Our school vision statement is:  At P.S./I.S. 226, we believe that the greatest impact on student achievement results from having highly expert, inspired, and passionate teachers and school leaders working together to maximize the effect of their teaching on all students in their care. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our School Community The Alfred De B. Mason School, Public School 226, is an Architecturally Barrier Free ABR Title I school, located in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. We are a diverse, multicultural PreK - 8 Community School servicing 1030 students. Our student body demographics are as follows: 30% Hispanic, 31% Asian, 36% Caucasian, and 1% African American. Twenty-six percent of our students are identified as English Language Learners and 16% of our students are identified as Students with Disabilities. One hundred percenC of our teachers are highly qualified; we have 81 certified teachers and 44 paraprofessionals. After being trained at the Yale University Center of Emotional Intelligence, P.S./I.S. 226 was the first District 21 school to adopt an evidence-based approach for integrating social and emotional skills into classroom practice that teaches students how to Recognize, Understand, Label, Express, and Regulate their emotions (R.U.L.E.R.) This approach to social-emotional learning in Pre-K through 8th grade in 2017, helps our school community integrate the practice of emotional intelligence into daily life. The four anchors of emotional intelligence that we use extensively with our faculty, students, and families are the Charter, the Mood Meter, the Blueprint, and the Meta-Moment. In Kindergarten through Grade 5, students participate in Positive Behavior Incentive System (PBIS) in which students receive individual and class certificates for exhibiting positive and respectful behaviors. These certificates are redeemed for prizes on a monthly basis. P.S./I.S. 226 is a Respect for All and No Place for Hate school where teachers and students share high expectations and work together to create an environment for shared success. Through the use of rigorous, standards-based instruction, ongoing formative assessment practices, and high expectations, our students are given a wide range of engaging learning opportunities to help them reach their potential. We have created a welcoming, warm, nurturing environment where parents, students and faculty feel comfortable and included. We showcase our proudest moments, events and student accomplishments through our school website, Remind messages, family newsletters, Twitter account, PupilPath assignment notifications, and grade newsletters. Our dedicated Parent Teacher Association works collaboratively with our teachers and administration to support our school initiatives and goals. An instructional philosophy which integrates the Common Core Learning Standards school wide allows us to successfully communicate and implement the teaching and learning expectations required for student achievement and progress. P.S./I.S. 226 became a Community School in 2017 and as a result of a generous five-year 21st Century Learning Grant, all students in grades K-5 now have access to daily free after-school programming providing a wide range of extracurricular activities including the arts, movement, sports, STEAM, robotics, dance, and music. In addition, our students receive homework support and exposure to hands-on content area learning. Supporting us in this new initiative, we partner with several reputable community-based organizations such as the following, The Leadership Program, Marquis Studios, Vision Ed and Media, and Keys to Abundant Life. The Leadership Program is our lead partner; Marquis Studios provides extracurricular arts opportunities; Vision Ed and Media offers lego robotics; and Keys to Abundant Life offers parent-child cooking classes, nutritional workshops, and more. In addition, the Global Language Project provides unique professional development opportunities for teachers to support our English Language Learners. Our students in grades 6-8 continue to receive free SONYC after-school programming in arts and 2018-19 CEP 10  crafts, physical education, technology, dance, and drama as a result of a long-standing partnership with the Federation of Italian-American Organization (FIAO). With strategic planning and school funding, we have also been able to provide an after-school ENL Academy and Saturday program to provide extended learning time for targeted groups of students in grades 3-8 to ensure that all students are making academic gains. In 2018, P.S./I.S. 226 received $450,000 in A+ Stem Labs equipment, thanks to a generous grant from our Borough President and local Councilman, that will dramatically enhance the hands-on STEM instruction in our building. In 2018, P.S./I.S. 226 also became a College Access for All School, which will target our 7th grade, partner with a CUNY school, and enable all 7th graders to go on at least one college visit. Elevate Education will offer a variety of workshops for 7th grade students and their families, including ones on study skills, mnemonics, time management, and more. Students in grades 4-8 lead their own conferences (SLC's) during parent engagement time to inform their parents how they're doing, set goals with their teachers, and work collaboratively to determine next steps with their teacher(s) and parents. Through a partnership with the JCC of Greater Coney Island, P.S./I.S. 226 parents are able to take free adult ESL classes. P.S./I.S. 226 is a special place where we are proud to celebrate our achievements and successes: ● We offer a multi-faceted curriculum which is further enhances by many wonderful programs that support our students many learning styles and needs. Some of these programs include: Newsela, IXL, Exemplars, and MyLibraryNYC. ● Our interdisciplinary hands on approach to science allow students to learn and explore all areas of study in a supportive environment. We partner with Carnegie Hall, We Thrive, Brooklyn Botanical Gardens Project Green, Institute of Play, Cool Culture, Arts Connection, JP Morgan Chase/PENCIL, Marquis Studios, and participate in Urban Advantage. Our families are invited to view, appreciate, and give feedback at the annual Science Expo featuring exemplary science project displays and rigorous experiment results. In 2018, we had our 1st Art Expo to showcase the incredible artwork in our elementary and middle school grades. ● We support and offer an excellent arts education curriculum to our students. This includes art, instrumental music, dance, drama and musical theater. Our students perform in monthly grade plays, instrumental concerts, dance showcases and Broadway Jr. Productions. In 2018, our 5th - 8th grade cast performed, "Beauty and the Beast." As a result of a Link Up Carnegie Hall grant, all of our 3rd graders will be performing with professional musicians at Julliard in May of 2019. year. ● Our physical education program includes students from all grades and ability levels. Students are involved in completing the Fitness Gram in grades 4 – 8. We have received the Let’s Move Active Schools national recognition award, in addition to the NYC Excellence in Schools Wellness Platinum award for the past three years. We offer many exciting sports programs for our students including Adaptive Physical Education, tennis, volleyball, basketball, and soccer. We also have the CHAMPS after-school athletic program and the BOKS before school physical education program. Our 2017-2018 Girls Volleyball team won the CHAMPS City Championship. ● We empower our students to "give back" to their community. Our Student Council (5-8) organizes annual charitable drives such as Penny Harvest, UNICEF and food drives. Last year, we raised over $5,500 for Pennies for Patients. Academic and service awards are attained by our students on an annual basis. Such honors include Socratic Society and Arista/Archon. - P.S./I.S. 226 hosts many extracurricular activities to build school spirit such as: school dances, Fall Family Fun Day, Pumpkin Patch, Panther Pride Fest, Talent Show, Winter & Spring Music Concerts, International Food Night, etc. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 11  SWD (Students with Disabilities) comprise approximately 16% of our student population. Approximately 26% of our population are English Language Learners (ELL's). 278 of our ELL's took the NYSESLAT Exam and they were incredibly successful. 74% (205 out of 278) tested into Expanding and Commanding categories. Only 6 remained Entering, 22 were Emerging, and 45 of our ELL's tested into the Transitioning category. Our SWD population needs to focus on making progress toward their IEP goals, which will help them work toward moving to a less restrictive learning environment. 10 of our special education students last year were either decertified from services or moved to a less restrictive educational setting. Teachers of SWD students, our School Assessment team, and our students' families collaborate closely on creating meaningful IEP goals and progress monitoring throughout the course of the year. Alignment in our special education department on best instructional practices, the new SEL program, RULER, and the new Professional Development plan using Fundations will help our SWD's who haven't been meeting grade-level standards according to our Fountas & Pinnell Reading Level EOY data. Our SWD's and ELL's need additional academic support, particularly in reading/writing, which are enhanced by the infusion of extensive after-school programming in all grades. Our 2018 EOY ELA data shows that the majority of our ENL and SWD students are still below or far below grade-level standards in all elementary grades. Our PreK, 1st, and 2nd grade ENL and SWD students continue to benefit from the new art cluster who was added in 2017. We are in the second year of a new 5th - 8th grade arts partnership with Arts Connection to target academic support for our ENL students through dance, technology, and the creation of digital portfolios. In addition, we have adopted a new Next Generation Science Standards-aligned science curriculum in 2018, Amplify Science, to immerse all of our elementary students, including our ENL and SWD students, in Grades K-5 in an authentic, inquiry-based, hands-on learning environment with a focus on engineering. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Our school made the most progress over the past year in the following key areas: ● Trust (3.88): Continue to build trust amongst the faculty around a shared vision on how to raise student achievement, set rigorous instructional goals, and work collaboratively with the school community. ● Rigorous Instruction (4.32): Our students are challenged, receiving timely feedback on their work, and know that their teachers set high expectations for all students. ● Effective School Leadership (3.89): Encourages feedback from school community in a variety of ways, holds monthly SEL breakfast workshops with families and demonstrates a commitment to shared decision making. Our instructional focus for this school year centers around raising student achievement through: ● Fully integrating our comprehensive, PreK-8 social emotional learning program, RULER, into our instructional practices in its second year to empower P.S./I.S. 226 students, families, and faculty to recognize, understand, label, express, and regulate their emotions in order to dramatically improve student outcomes. ● Developing teacher ownership of the Danielson Framework for Teaching to build their understanding and redefine their expectations of the Danielson rubric. Create a normed understanding of the tenets of the Danielson framework and fully explore each component, with a special focus on - 3c: Engaging Student in Learning - so that teacher expectations are clear and used to authentically elevate teacher practices.  Classroom teachers in grades 3-8 will receive extensive professional development on how to effectively use IO Classroom/Skedula to identify and track student mastery of Common Core Learning Standards, communicate regularly with families about student progress, and enter STARS Report Card Grades. 2018-19 CEP 12   Support and enhance foundational literacy skills using Fundations, Wilson, guided, and close reading strategies across content areas in Grades K-8. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K226 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1030 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 112 106 42 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 2 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 79.1% % Reduced Lunch 26.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 29.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 37.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 57.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 82 87 94.7% 6.4% 15.8% 1.7% 30.5% 1.0% 6 4% 4.5 53.9% 71% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Principal's Performance Observation Conducted Superintendent DiMola on March 23, 2018: "Year two of your journey as Principal has been an exciting year for you and the P.S./I.S. 226 community. Your commitment to the social-emotional learning (SEL) of students and adults is evident in your leadership with the launch of RULER out of the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence and your participation in the central E3 (Equity, Excellence and Empathy) pilot. The focus of this work is to merge the academic and instructional work we have been doing with Learning Centered Initiatives (LCI) and with SEL, incorporating the two resulting in SEL not being seen as an add-on, stand-alone component of education but rather a piece that is embedded and authentically part of what we do in educating the whole child. For year one of RULER, you are working on two Anchor Standards, with each class creating a Charter, the establishment of a school-wide Charter and on embedding the use of the Mood Meter into the daily lives of your students and faculty. Your goal for the year is to establish a common language around SEL and a basic understanding of the components of the program. You recognize that you are in the very beginning of this work and have strategically carved out time within the instructional program to engage students in examining RULER and how to use the components of the program to begin to regulate their emotions. Reflecting on feedback from last year’s PPOs and our conversations, you took steps to deepen your leadership with regard to understanding data in relation to student proficiency and how to track data to monitor practices at the school and to inform your decisions as you move forward. You have purchased Mastery Connect a platform that allows for easy collection of student data and provides user friendly applications for the manipulation of data so that you can study student proficiency in relation to standards. It is a forum for school leaders and teachers to enter and track data, monitor progress and inform daily instruction and long and short term goals. During our walk-through of the building and our classroom visits, we saw evidence of your instructional leadership. In the vast majority of classrooms, students are provided with access to rigorous instruction in standards based lessons. Teachers are planning to provide all students with access to the curriculum and are becoming more adept at using data effectively to ensure that differentiation and scaffolds are appropriate for students. Coherence is evident in pedagogic structure, high level tasks and activities that promote critical thinking and in how you value the use of assessments within daily instruction. We pondered if it the right time to push the instructional expectations by exploring authentic project based learning that pushes students to apply their skills in real world situations." After a review of state testing data, it has been determined that we need to increase the number of students, particularly ELL's and SWD's. making grade-level progress and reaching proficiency according to the ELA Common 2018-19 CEP 15  Core Learning Standards. The data shows that 37% (211 students) of our Grade 3-8 students scored a 2/4 on the NYS Math Exam. Out of that 37% who scored a 2/4, 16% (33 students) were SWD's and 20% (43 students) were ELL's. An analysis of our student achievement on the Grades 3-8 New York State tests in English and Math shows that P.S./I.S. 226 is significantly above the city average. ● In 2017-18, 58% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State ELA exam. - In 2016-17, 47% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State ELA exam. - In 2015-16, 43% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State ELA exam. - In 2014-15, 40% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State ELA exam. ● We had an increase of 11% between the 2016-2017 school year and the 2017-2018 school year. ● The NYC 2016-17 District 21 Average was 50% who scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State ELA exam. - The 2016-17 NY State Average was 40% who scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State ELA exam. ● In 2017-18, 54% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State Math exam. - In 2016-17, 46% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State Math exam. - In 2015-16, 48% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State Math exam. - In 2014-15 41% of our students scored a Level 3 or above on the State Math Exam. ● We had an increase of 8% between the 2016-2017 school year and the 2017-2018 school year. ● The NYC 2016-17 District 21 Average was 50% who scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State Math exam. ● The 2016-17 NY State Average was 40% who scored a Level 3 or above on the NY State Math exam. ● 100% of our 8th grade students who took the June 2018 NYS Algebra 1 Common Core Regents Exam passed. 20% scored an 85 or better. ● 100% of our 8th grade students who took the June 2018 Living Environment Regents Exam passed. 60% scored an 85 or better. ● 100% of our 8th grade students who took the June 2018 Second Language Proficiency Exam in Spanish passed. 74% scored an 85 or better. Capacity Framework Element: Rigorous Instruction – According to our School Quality Review (March 2015) ● We provide rigorous engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards; ● We align our resources to support instructional goals that meet student’s needs; ● We establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families and provide support to achieve those expectations; 2018-19 CEP 16  ● We analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. We have met previous target in student progress and achievement. All of the above data from the School Quality Review indicate that we are providing Common Core aligned rigorous instruction. Therefore, we continue to strive toward closing the achievement gap, so all students, including our lowest performing students, will succeed on the NYS ELA and Math assessments. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Survey, we scored a 4.32 out of a 5.0 for this element of the Capacity Framework, 0.45 higher than the district average and 0.63 higher than the NYC average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide rigorous, engaging, and data-driven professional development for teachers, which will result in 75% of targeted students in Grades 4-8 (2.4 - 2.9), including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), identified as part of our school’s focus group on the 2018 NYS ELA Exam, will reach their individualized learning targets, as measured by the 2019 NYS ELA Exam results. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Development and Collaborative Planning: We have developed a Professional Development calendar to provide rigorous adult learning opportunities to ensure that our curriculum is rigorous, adaptive, and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This year's focus will be on integrating RULER/SEL strategies across subject areas and grades, training all elementary teachers on Amplify Science, enhancing foundational literacy skills, supporting everyone in streamlining our data analysis/grading/communication systems using IO Classroom, analyzing data to inform instruction, and developing teachers ownership of the Danielson Framework for Teaching with a special focus on 3C: Engaging Students in Learning. September 2018-2019 Teachers/Administrators Principal, Assistant Principals, All Teachers and Paraprofessionals  P.S./I.S. 226 will identify appropriate individual proficiency targets for all students in the focus group. All teachers, administrators September 2018-2019 Teachers/Administrators  Assistant Principals will provide monthly All Teachers department and grade team meetings in Grades 3-8 to examine student work, review academic progress, and plan actionable next steps. September 2018-2019 Teachers/Administrators  On-the-spot formative assessments will be integrated into daily lesson plans to inform differentiated instruction for targeted students. All Teachers September 2018-2019 Teachers/Administrators  AIS and Extended Learning Opportunities for Students: Students in Grades 3-8 Administrative Team members meet with teachers regularly throughout the school year to discuss the individual strengths and needs of students, using last Teachers/Administrators January 2018 - April 2019 2018-19 CEP 18 ENL Students in Grades 3-8 November 2018 - May 2019 Targeted students in Grades 4-5 October 2018 - May 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 year's state tests results, pre and post assessments, and running records to determine AIS groupings and those in need of additional instructional support. Teachers carefully analyze student data periodically throughout the school year to set, adjust, and modify goals for students. A Saturday Academy will be provided to support targeted students based on their 2018 NYS ELA Exam score (2.4 - 2.9) in Grades 3-8. An ENL After-school program will be provided to support Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ENL students in grades 3-8. A K-5 after-school program will be provided to targeted students as part of our 21st Century Community School grant. A 6-8 after-school program will be provided to all middle school students as part of partnership with the Federation of Italian Americans (FIAO). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are provided numerous opportunities during the school year to learn and support their understanding of our rigorous instructional program and important school initiatives. All teachers are required to hold at least one parent workshop throughout the year to support families on integrating our instructional program at home. For example, parent workshops are given on how to effectively use Learning A-Z to support our ELL's in enhancing their language skills and on how to maximize the use of Newsela to increase reading skills in Grades 4-8. Meetings will be scheduled with the families of targeted students in Grades 4-8 after the 1st report card. Parent progress reports are distributed four times each year. Assistant Principals, Ms. Niarhos (3-5) and Ms. Montanes (6-8), along with Parent Coordinator, Ms. Lermer, will provide support to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. School Funds are used to purchase Newsela and IO Education/Skedula/Pupilpath. 2. Professional Development opportunities provided through the Department of Education. 3. 21st Century Community School funds and school funds will be used to support the K-5 After-school program. 4. Per-Diem funding to support substitute teachers for Professional Development/Workshop days. 2018-19 CEP 19  5. Title III Funds will be used to support our after-school ENL Academy. 6. Tax Levy ELA/Math Student funding will be utilized to support our Saturday Academy for targeted students. 7. Professional Development articles and books are carefully selected and shared with staff based on their professional learning needs. 8. Funds are used to provide coverage for teachers attending in-house intervisitations or visits to other NYCDOE schools. 9. Core Curriculum Allocation - Passport to Social Studies, Code X, and Ready Gen Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor the progress in the following ways: ● By February 2019, 40% of all identified targeted students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), will be on track to meeting their individual target toward proficiency. By February 2019, 40% of targeted students in Grades 4-8 (2.4 - 2.9), including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), identified as part of our school’s focus group on the 2018 NYS ELA Exam, will reach their individualized learning targets, as measured by the 2019 IO Classroom ELA MOY Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ELA Midyear Assessment in Grades 4-8, as shown on the IO Classroom/Skedula educational platform Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● After reviewing the 2016-2017 NYC School Survey, we received a 3.54, 0.16 higher than NYC and 0.07 higher than the District 21 Average. 91% of our students agreed or strongly agreed that they feel safe in their classes at school.  According to our School Quality Review Report (2014-2015), we have established a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for staff, students, and families, and provide support to achieve those expectations. ● Compared to 74% in other Elementary/Middle schools across New York City, our school community received 86% positive responses on the NYC 2015-2016 School Survey in the Capacity Framework Element - "Supportive Environment."  On the 2017-2018 Student Perception Survey, 59% of the Grade 6-8 students surveyed gave favorable responses in the area of Classroom Engagement. 52% gave favorable responses throughout District 21.  After review of Advance components 2a and 2d, we have found that most teachers effectively create an environment of respect and rapport, and manage their classrooms with regard to behavior well, taking into account the needs of each student and respect their students’ dignity. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a nurturing classroom and school culture, where students feel safe, supported, and challenged, will lead to an increase in student achievement, as evidenced by the 60% of students with disabilities in grades K-5 who will meet or exceed individual learning targets toward proficiency, as measured by Fountas & Pinnell Running Records. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Teachers will receive Professional Development Coaching Sessions from Wilson on the use of Fundations to systematically teach foundational literacy reading, spelling, and handwriting skills. 2. Teachers will work closely to track student progress using a Wilson Fundations data tracker in order to make appropriate adjustments to support struggling students and enrich students performing above mastery. 3. Teachers will utilize common planning time and engage in professional learning experiences in grade teams to plan and implemented targeted guided reading instruction based on Fountas and Pinnell running records. All K-2 Teachers All Teachers/Students All teachers 4. Teachers will dedicate their time on Tuesday during Parent Engagement to schedule appointments, send messages on student progress using PupilPath, and meet with families regarding the academic progress of their children. A.P./ Special Ed. Teachers September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Principal and A.P. (PreK - 2) Principal and A.P. (PreK - 2) Principal and A.P. (PreK - 2) Principal and A.P. (PreK - 2) 5. Our School Wellness Committee will collaborate closely with our administration and SLT to plan wellness-related activities that improve attendance and empower students/families. Teachers, Students, and Families September 2018-June 2019 Principal and A.P.'s 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be offered to support independent reading at home. A Family Literacy Night will be held in the Spring of 2019. Parent resources and instructional activities will be provided to all families to improve foundational literacy skills at home. Assistant Principal, Mr. Hyman, will oversee this work beginning in September of 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 22  1. Wilson Fundations Coaching site and access to online learning system and tracker 2. Cabinet Data Meetings 3. Per Diem to support Professional Development of K-2 teachers by District 21 and NYCDOE. 4. Data Specialist Per-Session work by Ms. Niarhos 5. Professional Development of K-2 Assistant Principal, Mr. Hyman. 6. OTPS and NYSTL Funds to purchase classroom and school library books. 7. Core Curriculum Allocation - Fundations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 60% of Students with Disabilities in Grades K-5 will make at least one half year's growth in reading, as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Running Records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Running Records Independent Reading levels Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Survey, we scored a 3.68 out of a 5.0 for this element of the Capacity Framework, 0.23 lower than the district average and 0.01 higher than the NYC average. 93% of our students say that their teachers respect their culture or background. 92% of our students say that they see a diverse group of races, ethnicities, cultures, and backgrounds represented in the curriculum. 95% of teachers say that as a result of the school's commitment, they would recommend their school to families seeking a place fo their child. According to our Quality Review Report (2016) the majority of our teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations, Teacher teams consistently analyze student assessment data and student work, but miss opportunities for modifying and adjusting curricula on a regular basis. ● Teachers meet in teams at have common planning built into their programs at least once per week. In elementary school they meet by grade level while in middle school they meet by department. ● Teacher teams analyze student data and review on a grade wide basis in the elementary school. ● In middle school, they meet by subject area to ensure that expectations are shared throughout the grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration strategies that support each learner will lead to improved student achievement, as evidenced by 75% of targeted students in Grades 4-8 (2.4 - 2.9), including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), as identified as part of our school’s focus group on the 2018 NYS Math Exam, will reach their individualized learning targets, as measured by the 2019 NYS Math Exam. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Teachers receive Professional Development from IO Classroom on how to identify and track student mastery of CCLS to inform pedagogical practice. In addition, teachers in Grades 3-5 will use Exemplars to supplement and support students in the deconstruction of complex math learning tasks. Teachers in Grades 6-8 will use IXL to support and engage students with real time, relevant assessment data personalized to their achievement level. 2. Teachers will engage in professional learning, identify power standards according to the 2018 NYS Math Assessment Item Skills Analysis and vertically plan as a Math Department in Grades 3-8 to appropriately differentiate instruction with rigorous learning tasks to support targeted students. All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers/Administrators All Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers/Administrators Teachers/Administrators Teachers/Administrators September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 3. Teacher teams will complete item analysis from Math and Algebra Common Core exams, from assessment grade data to identify gaps and align curriculum. All 3rd-8th Grade Teachers All 3rd-8th Grade Teachers 4. At the beginning of the school year all students in grades 3-8 take BOY assessments in Mathematics. Teachers utilize these results as a baseline score and identify strengths and areas of improvement for every student. The Go Math assessment is administered two additional times during the school year to monitor student progress. Teachers continuously analyze this data to make necessary adjustments to our pacing calendar prior to the administration of the NYS Math Assessment. Teachers meet at least once a week to collaboratively plan lessons based on current student achievement data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 25  parent workshops, online home access to Exemplars and IXL Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. IO Education Assessment to help teachers track mastery of learning standards using formative and summative assessments. 2. IXL and Exemplars to support school and home access to differentiated learning resources. 3. Strategically organized school-wide program that allows for common planning time for teachers 4. Professional Development opportunities provided through Department of Education. 5. Weekly Professional Learning Communities meetings, as well as several full day PD opportunities throughout the year for teachers to present and select Best Practices workshops to attend. 6. Core Curriculum Allocation - Go Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, 60% of targeted students in Grades 4-8 (2.4 - 2.9), including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), identified as part of our school’s focus group on the 2018 NYS Math Exam, will reach their individualized learning targets, as measured by the 2018 GoMath Midyear Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. GoMath 2019 Midyear Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 School Quality Survey, we scored a 3.89 in the Effective School Leadership element of the Capacity Framework, 0.17 higher than the district average and 0.36 higher than the NYC average. In the 2016-2017 School Quality Survey, we scored a 4.23 in Effective School Leadership. Principal Klein publishes and distributes a weekly Panther Courier to his faculty to celebrate and shout-out the best practices of the school building. The courier includes an Instructional Corner to reiterate the school's expectations around teaching and learning to ensure coherence of instruction. The administrative cabinet looks at students' data and teacher observation data on Advance each week to identify trends and make adjustments to the school's professional development calendar based on these needs. The administrative cabinet conducts Instructional Walkthroughs by grade and department to norm our observation process and monitor the effectiveness of our Professional Learning sessions. The Principal meets with the Instructional Cabinet each month to differentiate the professional learning plan for all faculty based on need and greatest impact on student achievement. According to our Quality Review Report 2016, school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to staff around professionalism, instruction and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. School leaders effectively communicate expectations to families and students connected to a path for college and career readiness. High expectations result in a culture of mutual accountability, allowing the school to successfully partner with families and support student progress towards college and career readiness expectations. ● School leaders consistently communicate to the faculty their expectations for classroom instruction and high student achievement. ● The school's professional development plan derives from teacher’s wants and needs, through surveys, discussions with teachers and observation data. ● Monthly, the principal meets with the professional development committee, so the principal can determine their professional development needs. ● Teachers request to attend off-site professional development to broaden their base of content and pedagogical knowledge. Administrators encourage these requests as well. ● Inter-visitation is encouraged and fully supported by administration. 2018-19 CEP 27  ● Excellent communication with the home is provided through the use of PupilPath messages, emails, school messenger, class newsletters, and phone calls on a regular basis. When needed, they are translated into native languages. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through effective school leadership and established structures that support cycles of learning, 75% of students in grades K-5, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), will demonstrate improvement in their ability to think critically in the content area of Science by reaching their individual learning targets, as measured by the Amplify benchmark assessment. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development in Amplify Science and common planning will be provided to elementary classroom and science cluster teachers to support the adoption of this new NGSS curriculum. All elementary teachers of science Summer 2018 - June 2019 Principal/Elementary Assistant Principals/Science Cluster Teachers Professional Development in the effective use of A+ Stem Labs will be provided to key teacher leaders in each grade band to support hands-on, STEM learning initiatives. 12 Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators/Designated Teachers The Principal and Teacher leaders in each grade band (K-2, 3-5, 6-8) will conduct intervisitations with three other K-8 District 21 schools to learn best instructional practices, turnkey to their grade band during Professional Development time, and support our instructional focus to quantify how we enhance intellectual engagement in classrooms. 3 Teachers & Principal October 2018- June 2019 Principal/Designated Academic Intervention Services (AIS). Cabinet members meet with teachers periodically during the school year to discuss the individual strengths and needs of students, using last year's state test results, pre and post assessments, running records, etc. Teachers carefully analyze student writing during the school year to identify needs and strengths as well as set short and long term goals for students. Level 1-2 Students are targeted for AIS services during the school day in Grades 2-8. September 2018- June 2019 Teacher teams, administrators Families are afforded many opportunities during the school year to learn about the school's instructional program, common core learning standards, and the instructional shifts. During these parent workshops, parents are introduced to Newsela, PupilPath, SEL/RULER, and how to support the learning of their children at home. Parents and Students September 2018- June 2019 Administration Professional Development sessions utilizing Diagnostic Writing Assessment data to inform instruction will be conducted using IO Education. All teachers in Grades 3-8 September 2018- June 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 29  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent/Family workshops monthly coordinated by grade team teacher leads in K-5. Ashley Lermer, Parent Coordinator, will notify all families about the workshops using PupilPath, email, and our school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. School funds will be used and subs will be provided, so the three teacher-leaders can be covered to conduct intervisitations at other schools. 2. School funds will be used and subs provided, so all teachers using A+ Stem Labs received Professional Development. 3. Core Curriculum Allocation - Amplify Science 4. Additional Professional Development opportunities provided through Department of Education. 5. Weekly Professional Learning meetings, as well as several full day PD opportunities throughout the years for teachers to present and select Best Practices workshops to attend. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 65% of students in grades K-5, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWD), will demonstrate improvement in their ability to think critically in the content area of Science by reaching their individual learning targets, as measured by the Amplify midyear benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Amplify Science midyear benchmark assessment in Grades K-5 and K-5 Report Card science grades Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Survey, we scored a 3.64 out of a 5.0 for this element of the Capacity Framework, 0.24 higher than the district average and 0.03 higher than the NYC average. 93% of families said that school staff regularly communicates with them about how families can help their child learn. 93% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. The school's average attendance rate during the 2017-2018 school year was 96%. 58% of our students achieved proficiency on the 2018 NYS ELA Exam. 54% of our students achieved proficiency on the 2017 NYS Math Exam. P.S./I.S. 226 views parents as partners in their child’s education. Our parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoons is utilized to provide outreach to parents by telephone, PupilPath messages, email, Panther Family Newsletters from the Principal and Parent Coordinator. Conferences are scheduled to update parents on student progress. In addition, teachers use this important time to write class and grade newsletters, update classroom websites, and conduct workshops for parents on curriculum and important issues affecting their child. Parent-Teacher conferences take place four times per year. Student-led conferences are conducted in Grades 4-8. The parent coordinator is available to assist with any questions or needs that they may have. Our PTA volunteers meet regularly to plan activities such as picture day, Fall Family Fun Day, bake sales, pumpkin patch, holiday boutiques, the book fair, and much more. Many exciting things happen at our school to create strong family and community ties. ● Social Emotional Learning Workshops & Parent Breakfasts led by the Principal each month.  Family Literacy Night hour- during this time, families enjoy reading books together and swapping popular book titles. ● Open access computer lab ● Parent workshops which include – Learning A-Z and supports for English Language Learners, Common Core Learning Standards, Newsela, Child development, Study Skills, Special Education, and more ● Translators provided for parent workshops and meetings. Translated parent notices are provided.. ● Federation of Italian American Organization – after school remedial/recreation program for students in Grades 6-8  21st Century Community School after-school program for students in Grades K-5. ● PupilPath ● School Messenger 2018-19 CEP 31  ● Class Websites ● www.psis226.com School Website ● School Twitter Account @psis226k  Annual Panther Pride Festival ● Class plays ● Panther of the Month/Monthly PTA Meetings ● International Food/Multicultural Night ● School dances - Annual Talent Show - Grades 3-8 - Partnerships with Arts Connection, United States Tennis Association, Cool Culture, JP Morgan Chase/Pencil, Carnegie Hall, Gowanus Canal Conservancy, Urban Advantage, CHAMPS/B.O.K.S., Arts Connection, Institute of Play, and Marquis Studios. - Broadway Junior performances - Annual Science and Art Expo According to our NYC 2017-2018 School Survey: ● 94% of P.S./I.S. 226 families gave positive responses in the "Outreach to Parents" category. ● 93% of P.S./I.S. 226 families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. gave positive responses in the Capacity Framework element, "Strong Family-Community Ties." ● 93% of P.S./I.S. 226 families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from the school. After careful review of our attendance and student progress, a focus is needed on moving students to the next level. To achieve this goal, a greater emphasis on parent involvement and facilitated conversations across content area teachers on specific student progress and academic and personal behaviors is warranted. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide College Access for All and R.U.L.E.R./SEL initiatives in Grade 7, which will result in 85% of targeted 7th grade students who will improve their academic performance, as measured by reaching their individual report card grade goals, in four core content areas. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Principal, MS Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, and two Middle School Teacher-leaders will attend College Access for All training sessions. The College Access for All Committee to use common planning time to plan and coordinate college visits, integrate CA4A skills into advisory, and share information with 7th grade team. 2. A Middle School Advisory will be programmed again, so every student has a weekly meeting with an advisor to discuss social/emotional needs and academic progress. Advisors will continue to receive training and resources to support their new advisory programs. 3. Families will receive a series of monthly SEL workshops to introduce them to the anchors of emotional intelligence, RULER, and strategies to support the social/emotional learning needs of their children at home. 4. Teachers will use their professional development and common planning time at the end of each marking period to monitor, track, and create action plans for advisees to improve their academic performance. Online courses from the Yale University Center of Emotional Intelligence will be given to all P.S./I.S. 226 faculty. Professional learning time will be utilized to give teachers an opportunity to integrate the Yale RULER online community into their teaching practice. 5. Teachers will receive RULER/SEL professional development, including training on the third and fourth anchor tools: the Meta-Moment and the Blueprint. All 7th Grade Teachers and Students. September 2018- June 2019 Principal/MS Assistant/CA4A Committee All Middle School teachers and students. September 2018- June 2019 Administration Parents September 2018- June 2019 Administration and Teachers Middle School Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Administration and Teachers All teachers and paraprofessionals October - June 2019 Administration 6. Elevate Education workshops on study skills, close reading, time management, mnemonics, and more will be provided to 7th grade teachers, students and families to support College Access for All initiatives. All 7th grade teachers, students, and families. October - June 2019 Principal/MS Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 33  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Elevate Education Workshops throughout the school year for students and families, SEL parent workshops conducted by teachers/departments. Monthly parent breakfasts with the principal to discuss RULER curriculum at home with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Counselor and Assistant Principal's Girls Club in the Middle School grades.  College Access for All Funding to pay for CUNY partnership, visit, buses, food, and more   PD time after school and Parent engagement time  STARS Programming per-session funding to ensure strategic programming to support SEL/Advisory into the Middle School schedule  RULER Community at Yale online courses to P.S./I.S. 226 teachers and paraprofessionals  Principal's Boys Club in the Middle School grades will meet two times each month during lunch. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● In February 2019, 50% of targeted 7th grade students will improve their academic performance, as measured by reaching their individual Marking Period 3 report card grade goals, in four core content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7th grade Marking Period 3 Report Card grades in four core content areas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Wilson Students selected are struggling with decoding skills and at least four grade levels below grade level. Saturday Academy Program Students who received a high level 2 and 3 scale score on the New York State assessment. AIS Students who are the bottom 1/3 of the grade as determined by the New York State assessment. ESL After School Program ESL students who received a beginner or intermediate level on the NYSESLAT during the spring 2014 testing window. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Wilson Wilson Wilson Provided daily during school hours. Saturday Academy Program A program that will be held on nine Saturdays for the duration of 1.5 hours. AIS Provided during school hours three times a week. ESL After School Program A program which is held twice a week for 90 minutes after school. It directly and systematically teaches students how to fluently and accurately decode. It is unlike traditional phonics programs in that instruction is very interactive and multi-sensory. It also thoroughly teaches total word construction, not just phonics. Students learn to encode (spell) as they learn to decode. Small group instruction (not to exceed 10 students) for grades two through five. Saturday Academy Program Whole group (not to exceed 20 students) and small group (not to exceed 10 students) instruction based on need for grades three through eight. Saturday Academy Program AIS A program which uses the Ready NYELA test preparation resources to prepare our 3 rd through 8 th grade students for Small group instruction (not to exceed 10 students) for grades three through eight. ESL After School Program 2018-19 CEP 35  Mathematics Students are identified as at risk students in ELA based on classroom data and assessments, by the classroom teacher. The classroom teacher devises a plan to infuse Tier 1 interventions. These services are tracked and monitored for 4- 6 weeks. During tier 1 implementation, the teacher utilizes various supports including the Learning Intervention Manual (LIM), to provide a scaffold support to all the students in meeting grade level standards. If the child does not show growth or digresses, the classroom teacher presents their grade representativeSchool Implementation Team(SIT) member with their Response to Intervention (RTI) Tier 2 requests. Upon review by the SIT/RTI Team, the student’s needs are assessed and services are determined and initiated if warranted. Saturday Academy Program Students who received a high level 2 and 3 scale score on the New York State assessment. Small group instruction (not to exceed 15 students) offered to students grades two through eight. the state assessments. AIS A program which used NY ELA Rehearsal Plus resources to strengthen math skills and concepts. ESL After School Program The program is facilitated by ESL certified teachers. The activities include development in the following areas: phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, oral language and comprehension using the Vocabulary Power Curriculum. Guided Reading instruction. Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) Best Practices in Reading Saturday Academy Program Saturday Academy Program Saturday Academy Program A program which uses the NYReady Math test preparation resources to prepare our 3 rd through 8 th Whole group (not to exceed 20 students) and small group (not to exceed 10 students) instruction based on need for A program that will be held on nine Saturdays for the duration of 1.5 hours. 2018-19 CEP 36  AIS grade students for the state assessments. grades three through eight. AIS AIS Provided during school hours three times a week. Small group instruction (not to exceed 10 students) for grades three through eight. AIS A program which used NY Math Rehearsal Plus resources to strengthen math skills and concepts. Guided math instruction Exemplars IXL Students who are the bottom 1/3 of the grade as determined by the New York State assessment. Students are identified as at risk students in Math based on classroom data and assessments, by the classroom teacher. The classroom teacher devises a plan to infuse Tier 1 interventions. These services are tracked and monitored for 4- 6 weeks. During tier 1 implementation, the teacher utilizes various supports including the Learning Intervention Manual (LIM), to provide a scaffold support to all the students in meeting grade level standards. If the child does not show growth or digresses, the classroom teacher presents their grade representativeSchool Implementation Team(SIT) member with their Response to Intervention (RTI) Tier 2 requests. Upon review by the SIT/RTI Team, the student’s needs are assessed and services are 2018-19 CEP 37  determined and initiated if warranted. Science AIS AIS AIS AIS Science aid provided for targeted Level 1 and 2 students and will be determined by standardized science scores, teacher assessments, as well as professionally developed assessment tools. Instruction includes vocabulary development in the content areas, use of manipulative, development of problem solving and critical thinking skills. Provided daily during school hours. Small group instruction (not to exceed 10 students) for grades three through eight. Students are identified as at risk students in Science based on classroom data and assessments, by the classroom teacher. The classroom teacher devises a plan to infuse Tier 1 interventions. These services are tracked and monitored for 4- 6 weeks. During tier 1 implementation, the teacher utilizes various supports including the Learning Intervention Manual (LIM), to provide a scaffold support to all the students in meeting grade level standards. If the child does not show growth or digresses, the classroom teacher presents their grade representativeSchool Implementation Team(SIT) member with their Response to Intervention (RTI) Tier 2 requests. Upon 2018-19 CEP 38  review by the SIT/RTI Team, the student’s needs are assessed and services are determined and initiated if warranted. Social Studies AIS AIS AIS AIS Provided daily during school hours. Small group instruction (not to exceed 10 students) for grades three through eight. Instruction includes vocabulary development in the content areas, use of manipulative, development of problem solving and critical thinking skills. Social Studies aid provided for targeted Level 1 and 2 students and will be determined by standardized social studies scores, teacher assessments, as well as professionally developed assessment tools. Students are identified as at risk students in Social Studies based on classroom data and assessments, by the classroom teacher. The classroom teacher devises a plan to infuse Tier 1 interventions. These services are tracked and monitored for 4- 6 weeks. During tier 1 implementation, the teacher utilizes various supports including the Learning Intervention Manual (LIM), to provide a scaffold support to all the students in meeting grade level standards. If the child does not show growth or digresses, the classroom teacher presents their grade 2018-19 CEP 39  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) representativeSchool Implementation Team(SIT) member with their Response to Intervention (RTI) Tier 2 requests. Upon review by the SIT/RTI Team, the student’s needs are assessed and services are determined and initiated if warranted. Criteria: The students are referred by the teachers based on informal observations and academic performance. The students are then reviewed by the School Based Support Team to determine the next steps/action plan. Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor We provide ● Lead Conflict Resolution Program ● Crisis Intervention ● Career Counseling School Psychologist Clinical counseling offered to the students. IEP mandated will be met for the students. Home-school contact will be initiated. One-to-one or small group (not to exceed three students) for grades kindergarten through eighth. School Psychologist One-to-one for grades kindergarten through eighth. Social Worker One-to-one or small group (not to exceed three students) for grades kindergarten through eighth. Social Worker Health Related Services Provided during school hours. School Psychologist Provided during school hours. Social Worker Provided during school hours. Health Related Services Provided during school hours . The Pupil Personnel Team meets twice per month and for all grades (K- 8.) At risk counseling will be offered to general education population to address issues and concerns. Emphasis will be on socialization and crisis intervention as needed. Health Related Services The Pupil Personnel Team provides intervention planning 2018-19 CEP 40  for all students identified as at-risk. Individual cases of Tier I, II, and III intervention for students in groups are reviewed by the committee of administrators, teaching and support staff. Specific intervention services are discussed and periodically monitored by the Pupil Personnel Team to assess progress. Occupational /Physical Therapy- Children at-risk are seen during the 50-minute tutorial based on the needs determined by the Pupil Personnel Team. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 75 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students will receive eye glasses, as needed, as a result of our new Community School designation. All STH students will receive backpacks with school supplies, books, clothes, and cleaning items. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 42  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 43  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to attract and retain Highly Qualified Teachers we will continue to provide the following:  We will advertise for vacancies on the DOE website and part of open market for high quality teachers.   Rigorous interview process will take place to ensure high quality candidates. Demonstration lesson, interview committee, and references will be required. If necessary, Administrators will attend recruitment fairs to attract high quality candidates for vacancies. Subject and Grade specific Instructional Lead Teachers will be identified in order to provide model lessons assist with instructional planning and work with teachers to baseline students most in need of additional support.  Monthly Grade Meetings will provide teachers an opportunity to work collaboratively with administration to address new initiatives inclusive but not limited to CCLS, Differentiated and Rubric Driven Instruction.  Vertical Instructional Lead Meetings will be held monthly to address grade level instructional concerns and/or mandates.  Mentor teachers are assigned to assist with supporting new and struggling teachers.  Administration will work with Instructional Leaders to discuss opportunities for professional next steps and feedback.  Both tenured and non-tenured staff will be evaluated utilizing the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teacher Effectiveness. In all cases opportunities to explore pedagogical concerns and next steps will be provided by administration.  15% of teacher P.D. hours which will be dedicated to of ELL instruction in order to best meet the instructional needs of our Beginning, Intermediate and Advanced Learners.  50% of ELL teacher P.D. hours to Common Core Learning Standards; specifically the impact of the Common Core Instructional shifts on teaching and learning as reflected by Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teacher Effectiveness. Our current teachers are all Highly Qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 CEP 44  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The administrators as well as teachers provide high quality Professional development for the teachers and paraprofessionals very Monday afternoon. Teachers are asked in a survey what they are interested in learning . The PD team also meets monthly to discuss the needs of each grade/department. Topics include , but are not limited to: ● Vertical Teacher Team Meetings ● Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport ● Item Skills Analysis of NYS ELA and Math Exams ● Building Capacity for instruction and professional growth ● New Teacher Meetings ● Computer Lab Functions - IO Classroom (formerly known as Skedula) - Google Applications for Education - Educational Applications to support Student Achievement - Teacher Team Data Dives - Social Emotional Learning and RULER Professional Development ● Google Sites uploading Newsletters and Class Information for Parents ● Introductory and Advanced Passport to Social Studies Curriculum Training ● ENL Strategies and New Language Progressions ● Planning Units of Study ● How to support students with Autism - Best Integrated Co-Teaching Practices to improve student outcomes - Wilson Fundations Coaching Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 45  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Activities and structures have been put in place to assist preschool children from their early childhood programs to our elementary school setting. Our school hosts an open house every spring inviting our future kindergarten students and families to school. At this time we meet with families to discuss kindergarten procedures as well as the academic expectations of the school year. Parents are able to meet our teachers and learn about the curriculum. They are also given an opportunity to visit our kindergarten classrooms where they view student work samples and observe our students actively engaged in their learning. Our school psychologist and parent coordinator also work with our community preschool centers to obtain additional information about our future students. Parents are invited throughout the school year to engage in hands on activities with their students. This keeps them informed of the units of study our kindergarten students are learning. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have a MOSL Committee that meets in September and they present information to the Staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 CEP 46  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 780,484.00 114,782.00 22,916.00 0 5,348,137.00 x x x x Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5c, 5d 5a, 5c, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 47   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS226 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS226 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 50  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S./I.S. 226, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 51  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting student-led (Grades 5-8) and parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 52  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 53  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2018-19 CEP 54  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 55  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Expanded after-school learning opportunities for our Kindergarten, 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th graders will support the language, academic, and social/emotional development of all students participating. It is specifically designed to support working families and provide equity and access to all of our learners, particularly those with learning disabilities and English Language Learners. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. As a result of increased incentives, awards, recognition, and expanded learning time as a result of the expanded K-8th grade before/after school 21st Century learning programs, attendance will be 97% for the 2018-2019 school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? As a result of the Community School goal to provide 15 hours of after-school programming to K-5 students each week, our English Language Learners will improve their language acquisition and show growth on the 2019 NYSESLAT. Students in grades 3-5 will show higher proficiency levels on the 2019 NYS ELA and Math Assessment as a result of their ELT, improved family engagement, additional arts involvement, etc. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership The Leadership Program Marquis Studios Vision Ed Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal K-5 K-5 K-5 ELT ELT ELT 97% attendance rate 97% attendance rate 97% attendance rate 2018-19 CEP 56  Global Language Project Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment K-5 PD for ENL Department 97% attendance rate, NYSESLAT achievement growth Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Expanded learning time will improve our attendance from 96% to 97% for the 2018-2019 school year as a result of 15 additional hours of weekly K-5 after-school programming. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The Leadership Program and its CSD will work closely with the principal to ensure that the expanded learning time and additional resources meets the school's vision and supports P.S./I.S. 226 students/families. After training is provided on the New Visions Data Sorter, it will be regularly used during data meetings between the CSD, A.P.'s, the principal, lead teachers, and other CBO partners. After taking a close look at the Community School Forum parent survey data, the principal and CSD have agreed to collaborate together on the following:  CS programming will showcase more student artwork throughout the building 2018-19 CEP 57   A Buddy system will be implemented where older students can serve as volunteer mentors for younger students  Additional homework support will be provided with a focus on ELA and Math   Increase the number of field trips Increase the number of school events/showcases including: Talent Show, Game Night, Movie Night, Zumba, etc. Increase the access to the gym and add sports teams for elementary students in CS programs   Provide additional resources for CS staff members regarding students with special needs  Provide additional ways to make the communication of school information more equitable - i.e. Parent Ambassadors to Translate in Multiple Languages Increase the summer program options for students and families  Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Sam Sheppard, Community Schools Director. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Both CBO's will work closely to share classrooms, the cafeteria, the auditorium, and the gym in order to ensure equity for all K-8 after-school participants. Snack will be provided before the beginning of after-school instructional activities. Sam Sheppard, CSD, will oversee the CS program each day with administrative support from the principal. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Start of K-5 after-school program is October 15, 2018. The anticipated end of the after-school program is May 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: ENL Academy: Our ELL Academy will run on Wednesdays and Thursday from 2:25 P.M. to 3:55 P.M. The program will begin in November of 2018 and is scheduled to run through May of 2019. We are inviting sixty-five students spanning from the entering to transitioning proficiency levels to attend the after-school program. The classes will be formed after we received the acceptance letters. Our greatest number of ENL students have a proficiency rating of entering through transitioning. Since this is our largest population of ENL students, we have decided to focus on these proficiency levels. The after-school program will help these students acquire the language. The program will be comprised of four classes. The expectation is to have ENL certified teachers run the program. Ms. Mena, Mr. Cruz, Ms. Delgado and Ms. Waxman. The classes will be organized based on ENL proficiency levels in order to best support the students as they acquire the English language. All instruction is in English. The first class, will consist of the entering and emerging students from grades 2 & 3. The second class, will consist of the entering and emerging students from grades 4 & 5. The third class will consist of entering and emerging students from grades 6 & 7. The fourth class will consists of the transitioning students from grades 3 through 5. The last class will consist of transitioning students from grades 6 -7. The goal of the after school program is to prepare the ELL students for success in their grade level content. The sessions are broken up into three segments. Time frame is as follows: 2:25- 3:00 snack and literacy, 3:00- 3:30 mathematics instruction and 3:30- 3:55 NYSESLAT test prep and dismissal. The curriculum the teachers are using is Language Power. It is a program that is designed specifically for ELL students and it is aligned with the ReadyGen themes and genres. Language Power uses leveled texts and grade appropriate themes to provide vocabulary instruction, decoding strategies and comprehension strategies. Language Power was purchased with Title III funds. During the mathematics session the teachers used differentiated materials and resources from GoMath to build mathematical terms and concepts with the students. The teachers also use NYSESLAT test prep materials to expose the students to the format of the assessment. The materials are grade level and age appropriate for each of the students regardless of their mastery level in English. We provide scaffolding in each level in order to prepare them for the assessment they will be taking in the end of the year. The teachers provide home language support in various ways. One method is the use of bilingual dictionaries. We have Spanish, Chinese, Urdu, Russian, etc. dictionaries the teachers use with their students. The teachers also rely on technology to assist them with supporting students with their home language. They use Google translate or The Free Dictionary on the ipads to help share content and ideas. We also use our bilingual staff to interpret for our teachers. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The teachers maintain a daily attendance records of the the students. A master list is also held at the asst. principal's office. Invitations are sent home to parents in English and their native language; as are all other notifications. All documents are maintained in the asst. principal's office. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development was successful for the 2017-2018 school year. ENL teachers attended professional development programming on an ongoing basis to assist them in providing the appropriate instruction to their ENL students. These professional learning sessions provided critical strategies and information for the teachers to use when they are meeting with immigrant parents. The professional learning sessions helped to address the needs of immigrant parents as well as how to have conversations with immigrant parents. These included PDs at the school site, as well as outside sessions that were provided through the Division of Language Learners and Student Supports. They were kept abreast of various PDs and workshops through the monthly newsletter put out by the DELLSS office. Additionally, the ENL team used the resources provided for educators under the English Language Learners link of the Department of Education website to guide their instruction. The site offered a wide variety of tools, videos, sample lessons, units and strategies which further their teaching practice. The procedure for our school is to have each member who attends a workshop to turn-key the information for not just the ENL team, but for all of the teachers who work with ENL students. They provided the PDs during our Monday PD sessions from 2:25 to 3:35 and during our teacher time on Tuesday afternoons, from 3:00-3:35. This created a collaborative setting in which the general education teachers could share their data trends and concerns with the ENL team and the ENL team could assist classroom teachers in using TESOL methodology and strategies and Language Progressions as support. Our newest initiative this year was the professional development with one of our key CBO partners: Global Language. Global Language is at no cost to the school. Global Language provided us with five professional development sessions. The provider met with the ENL teachers five times. The professional development consisted of workshops as well as, coaching sessions for both the ENL integrated and standalone instruction. The PD began with the analysis of the RLAT, RFSF and the RNMR reports. The ENL teachers were able to use these reports to identify high risk students and better prepare for them. We have scheduled the 5 Global Language PD sessions for this year. This year general education teachers will join the ENL teachers for the professional development. The first session and fourth sessions will be full day workshops. The second, third and fifth sessions will be morning workshops followed by afternoon coaching sessions. The PD provider will observe the ENL and general education teacher during a push-in sessions and then provide them feedback on their teaching practice. The focus for Global Language is to share the knowledge of language and literacy from a linguistic perspective. The workshops focus on phonemic awareness, decoding and syntax. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part C: Professional Development The facilitator is of no cost to the school. her cost is covered by the grant, however the school is responsible for covering the cost of hiring the substitute teachers which will cover the classrooms while the teachers attend the professional development sessions. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Topic 1: Open School Night Rationale: Introduce the parents to the curriculum material and resources used by the classroom teacher, as well as the supplemental resources which are used by the ENL teacher. Date/Time: September 17, 2018 4:30pm- 7:30pm Provided by: Classroom teacher and ENL provider Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ELL students. Topic 2: We Thrive Rationale: Promote understanding and organizational skills of students as they prepare for high school, college, and the workforce. Date/Time: October 16, 2018 6:00pm – 7:00pm Provider: We thirve Representative and M.S. asst. principal Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ELL students. Topic 3: Parent-Teacher Conference Rationale: Allow parents the opportunity to discuss their child’s performance and progress. Date/Time: November 15, 2018 12:30pm-2:30 & 4:30pm -7:30pm Provider: Classroom teachers. Audience: Parents of students of all grades. Topic 4: International Food Night Rationale: Promote diversity and allow families to share their cultural traditions and customs. Date/Time: December 20, 2018 4:30pm -7:30pm (This may change to later in the school year, if we receive the Family Engagement Grant we applied for in June 2018). Provider: PTA/Parent Coordinator/Administration Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ENL students. Topic 5: Fixed Mindset versus growth Mindset Rationale: Introduce the difference and give parents he strategies to build a growth mindset with their children. Date/Time: January 15, 2019 8:15am - 9:30am Provided by: School Administration Audience: Parents of current and former ENL students. Topic 6: Understanding Technology Rationale: Introduce and explain to the parents how we incorporate technology to communicate with them and also how the teachers use technology to help the students understand concepts. Date/Time: January 22, 2019 2:20 pm- 3:30pm Provided by: Technology Teacher and ENL teachers. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Audience: Parents of current and former ENL students. Topic 7: Student Led Conferences Rationale: Students will share with their parents the successes of meeting their goals and also thier next steps. Date/Time: On going throughout the month of February. Each Tuesday afternoon form 2:40pm-3:40pm (They will be scheduled by appointment only. Provider: ENL Team Audience: Parents of current and former ENL students. Topic 8: Parent-Teacher Conference Rationale: Allow parents the opportunity to discuss their child’s performance and progress. Date/Time: March 14, 2019 4:30pm -7:30pm Provider: Classroom teachers. Audience: Parents of students of all grades. Topic 9: Senior Night Rationale: Meet with all 8th graders and their families to prepare for the end of year activities, including how to complete high school applications. Date/Time: March 26, 2019 2:40pm-3:40pm Provider: Administration Audience: All parents and students of the 8th grade. Topic 10: Math is Just as GREAT! Rationale: Demonstrate how math is all around us and how the parents can use everyday activities to help their child. Date/Time: April 8, 2019 2:40pm-3:40pm Provider: ENL Team Audience: Parents of current and former ELL students. Topic 11: Game Night! Rationale: Promote diversity and allow families of all cultural backgrounds to meet and mingle. Additionally, the games promote literacy and strengthen math skills. Date/Time: April 23, 2019 5:00pm- 8:00pm Provider: PTA Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ENL students. In addition to these planned activities there will be meetings scheduled during the Parental Engagement time on Tuesdays. The meetings will be scheduled as the need to discuss attendance, IEP’s and other issues/concerns arise. The workshops are held at various times in order to accommodate our parents’ diverse time schedules. Workshops are held during the school day and can last from an hour to two hours. We also offer workshops in the evenings. These workshops can last an hour to two hours as well. The topic of the workshop dictates the time frame allocated for the workshop. We are not limited to the above listed workshops. Our teachers meet with parents every Tuesday beginning at 2:20. As we receive feedback from our teachers regarding parent concerns, we will host additional workshops to address the specific concerns and/or needs. We use a variety of ways to notify parents of upcoming events and workshops. We begin by reviewing data to assess our parents’ interpretation needs. Our primary source of data is extracted from the Home Language Aggregation report from our ATS system. We also use the Preferred Spoken Language and the Preferred Written Language from ATS to determine which languages are predominant in our school. The data has indicated that the following languages are the most frequently spoken languages in our school as: English, Spanish, Urdu, Chinese, Russian, Uzbek and Arabic. We 2018-19 CEP 63 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities have interpreters for non-English speaking parents. They speak Spanish, Urdu, Russian, Arabic, Italian, Punjab, Greek and Chinese. The Russian interpreters can also speak German and Polish and the Chinese interpreter can speak both Mandarin and Cantonese. Our general education teachers have also begun to use the services of the Translation & Interpretation Unit to communicate with the parents. The teachers use each Tuesday afternoon from 2:20 to 3:00 to communicate with the limited-English proficiency parents. This time is critical because it is uninterrupted and allows the teachers to discuss all pertinent information. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 0  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 0 0 0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2018-19 CEP 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The Alfred De B. Mason School Borough Brooklyn School Number 226 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Evan Klein Coach Florence Delgado ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kalyani Subramaniam Teacher/Subject Area David Brooks Teacher/Subject Area Oscar Cruz Related-Service Provider Robin Adelson Superintendent Isabel DiMola Assistant Principal Hrysoula Niarhos Coach type here School Counselor Denise Tsekouras Parent Parent Coordinator Ashley Frankel Field Support Center Staff Member Christine Etienne Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1021 2018-19 CEP 65 Total number of ELLs 343 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.59%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE Lang. SELECT ONEYesNo K 1 2 0 3 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 0 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 0 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The classroom teachers use benchmark assessments three times a year to monitor the students' progress. Fountas and Pinnell is used in grades K-5 as the reading benchmark assessment. Teacher created reading assessment is used in grades 6-8 as the 2018-19 CEP 66  reading benchmark. Teacher created Diagnostic Writing Assessment (DWA) is used in grades K-8 as the writing benchmark assessment. GoMath is used in grades K-8 as the math benchmark assessment. The assessments track the same standards and skills which quickly and easily identify progress, or lack there of. Additionally, the teachers use end of units assessments which are built into the curricula they use. The teachers maintain checklist, conference notes and spreadsheets to monitor the students’ progress. Entrance slips, middle lesson checkpoints and exit slips are also collected in order to form flexible groups on a daily basis. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All data for each class/student is uploaded to our shared Google Drive. Each person working with the student has access to the data to review it and make informed decisions about instruction. The teachers also upload the students’ data in Pupil Path so the administrators and the parents can have access to the data. Each grade has a pacing calendar they follow, which ensures the assessments are administered in a timely manner. We also add the due dates for each of the benchmark assessments to the faculty calendar so the entire staff is aware of the expectations 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use Fountas and Pinnell running records and Diagnostic Writing Assessment (DWA) to assess literacy skills. The data provides us information about comprehension skills (knowledge of vocabulary, syntax and prior experiences that lend to comprehension abilities), decoding and fluency. Additionally, we aggregate and analyze the data from the NYS assessments, regent assessments and the NYSESLAT. The data helps inform our school instructional plan by having the teachers increase phonological awareness, vocabulary instruction and decoding during literacy periods, increase responding to close reading questions by using text based evidence, increase phonological and morphological skills during word work lessons, and increase grammatical skills during writing and word work lessons.. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Once the data has been gathered, an analysis is completed to uncover any patterns, trends, and gaps. Students who are struggling and required additional assistance are then reviewed for additional services, such as AIS. We offer academic support in literacy for students in grades 2 - 8 and math support in grades 5 through 8. Students are also invited to attend the Saturday Academy which runs from January through April to assist with academic needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The school looks at the number of years the student has received ELL (date of entry, proficiency level, scores on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT) and decides what types of intervention the student needs. If the scores in the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT indicate difficulties in reading and writing over the course of two or more years, and little progress has been made due to other underlying academic issues, then the ELL teacher will focus on those areas for intervention. We utilize the different steps from the RTI model to assist us in determining which steps which should take. We provide the students with rigorous curriculum and monitor their progress through a variety of assessments. The classroom teacher has a benchmark assessments they administer and the ENL teachers have EL standards checklist which they complete every month. They review the student's progress or lack thereof. if a student is struggling then they are provided with extra attention, activities and targeted core instruction in order to give them the extra support. All the while the teachers are maintaining logs on the student's performance and behaviors. If the students still exhibits difficulty then the logs along with a referral form are submitted to the SBST for review. The team discusses what other strategies can be put in place to assist the student. The students is then reviewed again during the next meeting. During this second review, the SBST and the teacher will then decide what steps to take (go to Tier III Intensive Intervention, or continue on with targeted instruction) based on the student's performance. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 67  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The data patterns reveal that students who receive Expanding scores on the NYSITELL tend to pass the NYSESLAT within one school year. The students who receive Entering or Emerging scores in the NYSITELL tend to pass the NYSESLAT after 3 or more years. The less awareness a student has with literacy (letter recognition, sound-letter recognition, sight word knowledge, and reading comprehension) in the LAB-R, the more difficulty they will have of achieving success in the NYSESLAT. b. TBE program. If applicable. All the information is aggregated on an Excel document and shared with the ESL department, classroom teachers, and administration. The data is also shared in the Google Doc faculty folders. The data is also used as a reference point during any Data Dive Professional Learning Sessions, and with each of the benchmark assessments. c. DL program. If applicable. We have six fully certified ENL teachers who service our ELL students within the school day. (ENL certified teachers: Ms. Pokrovskaya, Ms. Joyce, Ms. Mena, Ms. Subramanian, Mr. DelMonte and Mr. Brooks.) All of our ENL teachers teach a freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program is provided in English using a blended model of push-in and pullout. The pullout program consists of our entering and selected emerging students being serviced with 5 periods of push-in and 3 periods of pullout (360 minutes per week) while our transitioning, expanding and commanding students are serviced using the push-in model. In grades K-2 the ENL provider pushes in to the classroom during guided reading to lower the pupil teacher ratio and to provide intensive small group instruction. In grades 3-8 the ENL provider pushes in to the classroom during various content areas. Pushing in to the content areas ensures that ENL Standard 5: English for cross-cultural knowledge and understanding is met. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Not Applicable 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Not Applicable 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have a living excel document which includes the student's date of entry, ENL proficiency and required number of minutes for ENL instruction. We use this as the base to create schedules/programming the ENL department. The programs are posted outside each of the ENL teacher's doors, kept on file in the main office and a copy is provided to the common branch teachers. Administration ensures they minutes are followed by conducting strategically planned informal observations according to the program cards. The students are also programmed into StarsClassroom in order to ensure we have a cross check and all students are accounted for. We review the RDAU report sent to us monthly from Brooklyn South Field Support which determines if we have any un-programmed students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 CEP 68  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We use the CCLS to help deliver core content to our English language learners (ELLs). To become successful students, they need to learn grade-level content as well as the English language skills needed to access that content. We integrate and scaffold the classroom materials for math (Go Math), social studies, science and language arts (Ready Gen and ELL programs such as On Our Way to English), while utilizing strategies and methodologies to support the ELLs learning these content areas--math, science, social studies, and language arts. In math, we teach math vocabulary and how it has multiple meanings. For example, students understand the different meanings of words such as "table" and "quarter," definitions such as “associative property” or “zero property,” as well as how to use the vocabulary correctly in a mathematical context. Students are encouraged to use bilingual support when working with each other, since students often understand material better if they explain it to another student. Furthermore, the new student will benefit from hearing the explanation in their first language. We also provide math glossaries in the students’ native languages. We also provide visual cues, graphic representations, gestures, realia, and pictures. Students get the chance to work with objects and images in order to master vocabulary. If there aren't enough items for each student, manipulatives are used on the Smartboard to demonstrate the vocabulary in front of the students. For example, teachers create a Math Word Wall or Math Charts that has three parts: key vocabulary, "in your own words" definitions, and a variety of ways to portray a function. For example, multiplication is portrayed by the following symbols: x, *, and ( ). Lastly, we explicitly identify key phrases or new vocabulary to pre-teach. This strategy will help students decide which math function they should apply. Example: "more than" means "add." (See hotlinks for more references about math vocabulary.) In social studies, we try to access the ELLs background knowledge since ELLs may not have the same background knowledge that their peers have or that textbook authors take for granted. We also have ELLs bring different perspectives by sharing their own experiences to the classroom. ELLs and non-ELLs are encouraged to bring in realia, share stories from their travels or home life, and ask questions about geographical features, cultural history, political backgrounds, etc. Going of field trips, also allow our ELLs to learn and access social studies information in their community. Academic language and vocabulary is explicitly taught as any other content area. Visuals, adapting the text, showing videos, and creating charts assist the ELLs in learning specific social studies vocabulary. Students are encouraged to use picture dictionaries to assist them in understanding social studies content vocabulary. In science, we continue to access the ELLs background knowledge, provide visuals and graphic representation, and have interactive lessons in which students are completing experiments and observations to assist in grasping core science content. Science allows our ELLS to plan and carry out investigations, as well as explain their investigations using scientific language (i.e. I observe that___, My hypothesis states__, I conclude that___). Charts and visuals, as well as modeling often provide the best methods to assisting our ELLs in using the appropriate syntax and vocabulary for science. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher, the classroom teacher and the parents collaborate on the students proficiency in their native language as well as in English. Interpreters are also used to communicate with the student to determine their proficiency in their native language. The conversations along with the teachers’ review of student work and performance during oral presentations determine whether a student should be evaluated in their native language. All students in grades K- 2 who registered for the Gifted and Talented Assessment, may have an interpreter assigned to them. All students in grades 3 through 8 can have the Math State Test provided to them in their native language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Plan for SIFE – SIFE students are provided with the extra help they need because of their interrupted schooling through AIS services. In the elementary grades we offer Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Quick Reads, Wilson, and Great Leaps. In the Middle School we offer the Rewards Program. Additionally, we provide classes in our after-school Title III ESL program. We also encourage them to attend the ENL Academy Program where the ELL students can receive additional intensive small group instruction. Peer tutoring is also available for additional support. Plan for Newcomer- Based on our extensive and long-term experience as ENL teachers, we developed programming accommodations for our newly arrived beginning level ENL. We have found that in order for these children to succeed, it is 2018-19 CEP 69  essential that they receive double periods of ENL services in a pullout model for their first year in this country. This enables the student to develop oral language skills in a friendly, non-threatening small group environment. It is also important for these students to acquire the literacy skills they need to function in their regular classroom. These skills are best developed through small group instruction. We monitor the scores from the NYSESLAT as well as the Periodic Assessments and provide AIS to those students not making adequate progress. In order to provide additional instructional support to our ENL, a Title III grant provides funds for implementing an after school ENL program twice a week. We prepare our ELLs for the NYS ELA by using effective practices in ELA instruction and ENL instruction. We emphasize vocabulary development and we don’t simplify text but rather "amplify" text. ew York State Standards. Academic rigor, Accountable talk, setting clear expectations and use of graphic organizers are fundamentals upon which we base our ENL program. ENLs who have reached proficiency are given extra reading and writing help from our A.I.S. specialists and reading program. Articulation between classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and A.I.S. specialists and administration is on-going. This articulation helps monitor the continued success of ELL students who reach proficiency. Our Middle School students also attend the Title III after-school ESL program. Plan for Developing – This group of ENLS is mandated to attend our extended day program. In addition, they receive intensive small-guided reading instruction focusing on skills and strategies at their instructional reading level by the ENL teacher in grades K-2 and in the content areas in grades 3-8. Additionally, A.I.S. is provided for these students and monitored in six-week cycles. Students who do show progress are re-evaluated for another A.I.S. program. Plan for Long Term- Our plan for long term ENLs is to encourage them to participate in after-school AIS programs. Participation in our school’s AIS programs, such as, Wilson, Quick Reads, and Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) is mandated. Pupil Personnel Team evaluations may be requested by classroom teachers and service providers. The Pupil Personnel Team in conjunction with the classroom teacher identifies learning problems that the child may have and suggests remediation/AIS to ensure the student’s progress. The progress of the child is tracked by a case manager and is revisited in six-week cycles. The ENL component of Reading Street Program (grades K-5) and Literature Program (grades 6-8) is helpful in aiding these children to reach the standards in English Language Arts. Plan for former ELLs- We have data spreadsheets which keep track of our former ELL students. These students are provided support by automatically being mandated for the tutorial sessions provided by the school. They are also included in the the Academic Intervention Services which are provided during the school day and they are automatically invited to any of the test-prep academies provided during the school year. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ESL teachers generate a list of students from the NYC Dept. of Education Student Special Service Detail Information Report. This list contains the names of all the ELL-SWDs. The ESL teachers then group the students by grade and by content area, depending on their grade-level. Next, they organize a schedule for each group of students based on the NYS CR Part 154 mandated number of units. Then, they cross reference their schedules with the other mandated service providers (OT, PT, Speech, etc.) to ensure there aren't any scheduling conflicts. Once the schedules are finalized, they are then reviewed by administration to ensure all mandated requirements are met. Teachers of ELL SWD students collaborate with ESL teachers to acquire ESL strategies and practices. They also attend workshops focused on ELL strategies in order to better prepare themselves for their students. They use visual cues, graphic organizers, guided small group instruction, Tiered Vocabulary, choral reading and speaking, Reader’s Theater, realia, repetition, vocabulary development strategies and scaffolded questioning techniques to provide access to academic content. They also use the ELL Intervention Resources from the ReadyGen Literacy Program and the ELL components of the Rigby Literacy program. During the math periods, the teachers use a wide variety of math manipulatives, scaffolded ELL math activities, and Tier I and Tier II RTI interventions from the GoMath Program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We provide many opportunities for our ELL-SWDs to spend time with non-disabled peers. Our ELL-SWDs eat lunch and participate in recess along side their non-disabled peers. Additionally, then take the same school trips and participate in the same school performances. Our ELL-SWDs are also offered the same after-school opportunities as their non-disabled peers. Lastly, we focus on providing mainstream opportunities for our students in specific content areas. This requires a lot of collaboration on the part of the ESL and classroom teachers. Through the process of collaboration they can design curriculum maps, lesson plans and differentiated activities which meet an individual students' needs. During the collaborative 2018-19 CEP 70  process they also can determine time-frames and schedules which will yield the most effective instruction and mastery of content. We also implement Student-Led Parent Conferences where the students reflect on their work and self-monitor their progress. Based on their reflection they can identify strategies to use to help them achieve a goal and/or set a new goal if it has been mastered. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The Entering, Emerging and some Transitioning students require additional pull-out instruction in ELA, Math and the content areas. Lessons are scaffolded in ELA, math and the content areas during these pull-out periods, using various materials such as teacher made materials, picture dictionaries, graphic organizers, charts and posters. All instruction is in English. Transitioning students who are approaching proficiency require more push-in support during ELA, math and content areas. Conferencing, guided practice and study sheets for reading and math assist them in their learning. Since our ELL students come from diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds, native language is minimally utilized to aid in comprehending math, ELA and other content areas. Our school focuses on the TESOL methodology, not Transitional Bilingual or Dual Language. As a result, native language intervention is rarely used Occasionally, a native speaker is asked to translate specific content vocabulary, or language dictionaries and computer applications on iphones are used for translating a students' home language to English. During assessments/testing we use translators or translated materials. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We are closely monitoring the placement of our ELL students within each of the classes. We are focused on grouping the Entering and Emerging ELLs in the same class on a grade; whereas, the Transitioning and Expanding students are grouped together in the same class on a grade. The Commanding students are either placed with the Transitioning and Expanding students and/or in our Accelerated classes. This new grouping is allowing the ENL teacher to better plan for the different levels and to meet the mandated time requirements. We are also expanding our ESL after-school academy. By doing so, we can reach more ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At this point in time we do not have any programs or services which we will discontinue. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? On Wednesdays and Thursdays, from2:25- 3:55 our school offers after-school to address ESL for students of all proficiency levels. The Kindergarten through 5th grade ENL students are also invited to participate in the 21st Century after-school programs which include crafts, games, homework help, cooking and drumming, to name only a few. The middle school ENL students are invited to attend the Federation of Italian Americans after-school program. During school hours, some of the Expanding ENL students are evaluated for academic intervention services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school uses the Rigby program, “On Our Way to English,” for ESL instruction, during small group instruction or during after school. This programs includes books for read aloud, leveled reading books for guided and independent reading, grammatical instruction, phonics and vocabulary posters, graphic organizers to assist students with writing, and worksheets to extend grammar and writing lessons. The Smart board is often used during lessons to provide students with other modalities for learning. We have purchased licenses through the Learning A-Z digital literacy curriculum. Additionally, websites such as Starfall.com, bogglesworld.com, brainpop.com are used to scaffold lessons, as well as extend concepts. Also, the Ready Gen program and GoMath program provided scaffolded resources to support our ENL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Dictionaries and glossaries in native languages are given to support our students in ESL. Peers and paraprofessionals are also called upon when translation/interpretation is needed. The teachers use Google translate to help the students. 2018-19 CEP 71  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ENL students are held to the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and Home Language Arts progressions (HLAP) which are specifically outlined to address a students age, grade and language proficiency. Picture dictionaries are used for the primary grades, while glossaries are used for the upper grades. For lower grades, more picture support is needed to assist students with vocabulary development. Graphic organizers are often used for the upper grades when writing narratives and expository essays, while lower grades are required to illustrate events and label, before writing 1 or more sentences to explain an event. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not share the building with another school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? ELL students who enroll before the start of the school year can meet with the Parent Coordinator and receive a tour of the school. They are also encouraged to seek community help for language and cultural lessons (e.g. libraries, social networks). During the school year, newly enrolled ELLs are encouraged to attend the ESL after school program, two times per week. During pull-out sessions, newly enrolled students receive scaffolded instruction to assist in their learning. Also, during push-in instruction, lessons are scaffolded and materials are given to help students receive the support needed. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Not Applicable 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Not Applicable Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 72  Our ESL students present a unique challenge for classroom teachers. Staff members who work with these students need ongoing professional development so that they can help the students achieve proficiency in English language, as well as, in all academic content areas. As educators, we must continuously reflect on our teaching and update our practices to meet the needs of our ELL students and focus on effective ways to help them reach their potential. In order to help our staff to become more sensitive to the needs of the ELL population and aiming at academic success, we provide the teachers with ongoing professional development throughout the year. The teachers attend various workshops that deal with a wide variety of topics and issues of which the following is a partial list: - Guidelines and procedures for identifying and placing new English Language Learners -Strategies and approaches to help classroom teachers enable ELL students to participate effectively in academic classroom activities -Teaching critical thinking and study skills to ELL students using strategies learned at LCI professional development -Learning about the new initiatives/assessments such as ELAND and NYSITELL - NYSITELL Raw Score Conversions -Collaborative Strategic Reading CSR - Common Core Videos of ELL Instruction We are in year two of the Global Language Professional Learning Sessions. The professional development includes the ESL department and at least one general education teacher from each grade. The ESL teacher is paired up with the general education teacher and they are working on developing lesson which build strong phonological awareness. In addition, professional development/exploration of effective practices will be offered throughout the year during Inquiry team meetings, collaborative team meetings and after-school study groups. Our ELL teachers will provide PDs for students of ELLs at PS 226. They will provide PDs on Utilizing ESL Strategies for Academic Content”, “Understanding the NYSESLAT,” “Building on Their Vocabulary,” to name only a few. The teachers will also have access to the professional learning videos on Engage NY, as well as attend DOE provided PDs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school is a PreK-8 school. Many of our elementary students transition into our middle school from grade five. In grade five we departmentalize for all major subjects to help prepare the students for middle school. Middle School eighth graders are offered to participate in a transitional summer school program at the College of Technology to assist them in making a smooth transition to High School.Our staff is provided support to help our ELLs make these transitions. We offer ongoing professional development through faculty conferences, grade level meetings, Inquiry work focused on ELL populations and professional development workshops provided by our Network Leaders. Sustained professional development is ongoing throughout the school year. The Inquiry Team has conducted surveys to assess teacher needs. Based on the results of these surveys, professional development is provided by our ESL department and outside partnerships and the DOE. The professional development touches upon a variety of topics; scheduling for ENL instruction- discusses how to create a schedule to ensure all of our students are being serviced according to mandates, identification- how to properly assess students to determine if they are ELL students, differentiation- the use of instruction techniques to reach a varied ELL population (emerging, transitioning, etc.), compliance- understanding mandates and reports, etc. All agendas and time sheets from each of the professional development sessions are kept on file in chronological order by the principal. They are referred to when planning for future sessions and looking for follow-thru from the teachers in attendance of the sessions. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ENL certified teachers schedule one-on-one meetings with the parents of students in the ENL program. The sessions take place during the Tuesday Parental Engagement time of 2:30 pm - 3:00 pm. The ENL teacher will discuss a student’s strengths, weaknesses and goals for the year. They will also put in place a time line with benchmarks to achieving the goals. An interpreter may be present if the parent needs. If we do not have an interpreter who speaks the parent’s language then the ENL teacher will use the Over The Phone interpreter services. The ENL will then host a follow up visit in the middle of the year and the end of the year to assess if the student’s goals were met. 2018-19 CEP 73  2018-19 CEP 74  Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Through the support services of the Family Assistants, the Parent Coordinator, the Parent Teacher Association, (P.T.A.), the ESL teachers, and various other school personnel, we have established a link between the school community and the parents. Provisions are always made to have interpreters at our parent workshops. In addition, parent notices are sent home in the various languages spoken by our students. Parents and family members are invited to share their culture and talents with the different classes. As mandated, at the beginning of each school year, the ESL staff provides the new ELL parents with an orientation workshop. At this workshop, parents learn about the different choices they can make regarding their children’s education. Parent workshops are held during the year to provide parents with information about academic skills and requirements, assessments, testing, technology and other areas that help the parents assist their children to be successful learners. , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 2018-19 CEP 75  11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Paste response here: School DBN: Evan Klein Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) The Alfred De B. Mason Principal Evan Klein Assistant Principal Hrysoula Niarhos Parent Coordinator Ashley Frankel ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kalyani Subramaniam Parent Carol Nagi Teacher/Subject Area David Brooks Teacher/Subject Area Oscar Cruz Florence Delgado Coach Coach School Counselor Denise Tsekouras Isabel DiMola Parent Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 6/30/17 Other 6/30/17 Other Other 21K226 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 Christine Entienne 2018-19 CEP 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21K226 School Name: PS/IS 226 Superintendent: Isabel DiMola The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Hrysoula Niarhos Asst. Principal Not yet- Dec. 12, 2018 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use a variety of data to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs. Our primary source of data is extracted from the Home Language Aggregation report from our ATS system. The Home Language Aggregation Report identifies the predominant languages spoken in our building. We also use the Preferred Spoken Language and the Preferred Written Language from ATS to determine which languages are predominant in our school. Other sources are the HLIS , Student Registration Form and the Emergency Card. In addition to these reports, each classroom teacher sends an informal survey to the parents to indicate with which language they prefer to communicate. This survey is sent home yearly because parents many have changed their preference. After all of the data is aggregated a list is complied and a copy is provided to the parent coordinator, the school secretaries and the school aides. 2018-19 CEP 78  We use teachers or paraprofessionals to translate written documents and to interpret during PTA meetings, school workshops, Parent-Teacher Conferences and IEP meetings. We also rely on the Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist with translating documents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name The documents our school typically disseminates which require translation areas follows, but not limited to: Beginning of Year: Student handbook Conduct and Discipline Information Entitlement of services (IEP or ELL) Video Consent Forms Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2018-19 CEP 79  Internet Consent Forms School Calendar State Testing Dates School Curriculum Monthly Newsletters from the Parent Coordinator Newsletters from the PTA Newsletters from the teachers Upcoming events in the school; (workshops, After-school Programs, concerts, etc.) School Spirit Activities HIV Opt-out letters Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our focus is to provide our parents opportunities to understand their children. In addition to the Parent Orientation held during the beginning of the year, we offer a variety of parent workshops throughout the school year. These workshops are facilitated by the classroom teachers, ESL teachers, School Counselors, administration and the Parent Coordinator. The workshops cover many different topics. They are as follows but not limited to; Topic 1: Open School Night Rationale: Introduce the parents to the curriculum material and resources used by the classroom teacher, as well as the supplemental resources which are used by the ESL teacher. 2018-19 CEP 80  Date/Time: September 17, 2015 4:00pm- 7:00pm Provided by: Classroom teacher and ESL provider Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ELL students. Topic 2: Movie Night Rationale: Promote diversity and allow families of all cultural backgrounds to meet and mingle. Date/Time: October 2015 5:00pm -7:00pm Provider: PTA Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ELL students. Topic 3: Parent-Teacher Conference Rationale: Allow parents the opportunity to discuss their child’s performance and progress. Date/Time: November 5, 2015 4:30pm -7:30pm Provider: Classroom teachers. Audience: Parents of students of all grades. Topic 4: International Food Night Rationale: Promote diversity and allow families to share their cultural traditions and customs. Date/Time: November 2015 4:30pm -7:30pm Provider: PTA Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ELL students. Topic 5: Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards Rationale: Introduce and explain to the parents CCLS and the DOE expectations. Also, expose the parents to the test formats and regulations. Date/Time: January 2016 8:15am - 9:30am Provided by: School Administration 2018-19 CEP 81  Audience: Parents of current and former ELL students. Topic 6: Understanding Technology Rationale: Introduce and explain to the parents how we incorporate technology to communicate with them and also how the teachers use technology to help the students understand concepts. Date/Time: January 2016 2:20 pm- 3:30pm Provided by: Technology Teacher and ESL teachers. Audience: Parents of current and former ELL students. Topic 7: Reading Can be FUN! Rationale: Demonstrate the five key areas of reading and how the parents can help their child at home. Also, to explain to the parents running records and the Fountas and Pinnell leveling system we use for assessments. Date/Time: February 2016 2:40pm-3:40pm Provider: ESL Team Audience: Parents of current and former ELL students. Topic 8: Parent-Teacher Conference Rationale: Allow parents the opportunity to discuss their child’s performance and progress. Date/Time: March 3, 2016 4:30pm -7:30pm Provider: Classroom teachers. Audience: Parents of students of all grades. Topic 9: Senior Night Rationale: Meet with all 8th graders and their families to prepare for the end of year activities, including how to complete high school applications. Date/Time: March 2016 2:40pm-3:40pm Provider: Administration Audience: All parents and students of the 8th grade. Topic 10: Math is Just as GREAT! 2018-19 CEP 82  Rationale: Demonstrate how math is all around us and how the parents can use everyday activities to help their child. Date/Time: March 2016 2:40pm-3:40pm Provider: ESL Team Audience: Parents of current and former ELL students. Topic 11: Game Night! Rationale: Promote diversity and allow families of all cultural backgrounds to meet and mingle. Additionally, the games promote literacy and strengthen math skills. Date/Time: April 2016 5:00pm- 8:00pm Provider: PTA Audience: All parents including parents of former and current ELL students. In addition to these planned activities there will be meetings scheduled during the Parental Engagement time on Tuesdays. The meetings will be scheduled as the need to discuss attendance, IEP’s and other issues/concerns arise. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 83   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We inform our parents of the languages which can be interpreted in the building by hanging the T&I Welcome Poster in the main lobby and the arrival entrance of the Pre-Kindergarten students. We also have the Language Identification cards with the Safety Agents and the all office personnel in order to identify which language the parents speak. Additionally, we have brochures about the expectations for each grade level in a variety of languages in the main lobby and they accompanied by the Parent’s Bill of Rights. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Ensuring the quality of our language services to our LEP is very important. We will gather and monitor feedback throughout the school year. Some methods we have put in place are: - School Survey for Parents to provide information on our communication methods - Monitoring of Multilingual Welcome Poster by the Safety Agents and office personnel - Constant communication during PTA meetings and workshops -Informal information gathered during teacher-parent face-to-face meetings 2018-19 CEP 84 
