2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K235 School Name: P.S. 235 LENOX SCHOOL Principal: LAURENCE LORD 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Janice Marie Knight School 18K235 School Number (DBN): 331800010235 PreK - 8 525 Lenox Road Brooklyn, NY 11203 718 773-4869 Phone Number: 718 773-0048 Fax: Laurence D. Lord llord@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Laurence D. Lord Janet Zysberg Maria Duncan PhuongHuynh Andrew Vaughn N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 18 Beverly Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 E 95th St, Brooklyn, NY 11236 Superintendent’s Office Address: BWilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 566-6008 Phone Number: (718) 649-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Degovia, Mauriciere FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th St., Brooklyn, 11209 Executive Director’s Email Address: MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov 718 759-4862 (718) 759-3910 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PhoungHuynh Janet Zysberg Maria Duncan Patricia Tesoriero Andrew Vaughn EricaBrandford JezelNicholas Ann-Marie Self *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Jennifer Balis Kyle Larkin Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/2nd Vice President Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/1st Vice President Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview 2018-19 CEP 9  PS 235 - Janice Marie Knight Schools Mission Statement directly ties into the Chancellors Framework for Great Schools in all areas. In particular we believe that only with “Strong Family-Community Ties” and “Trust” can we grow academically and socially as a school. Mission Statement In recognition of the unique abilities and talents of our students, staff, parents and school community, we endeavor to work together to provide quality educational programs and experiences in order to maximize each child’s potential/capabilities. In addition, the school community will endeavor to ensure that each child’s ambitions and aspirations are realized. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 235 - Janice Marie Knight School is a PreK-8 school with 1267 students and growing. The population of the school is Asian: 1% | Black: 94% | Hispanic: 2% | White: 1%. Our school community is quite unique as we have students located at three sites. Our Main Building comprises the majority of our elementary school students. At our Early Childhood Center six kindergarten classes, one first grade and one second grade class is located. Our middle school students are located at our Lenox Academy. Although our three sites are separated by distance, our student and teacher initiatives keep us united as one. At all of our sites we have grade and community appropriate events. One of our most successful initiatives is our No Place for Hate program which is linked to our Restorative Justice and Restorative 360 program. The need to raise awareness with regard to how we treat one another and what is happening in our neighborhoods, communities and the world is of such importance that we felt it necessary to create a teaching position with just that focus. At our Main Building Mr. Eisen meets with 25 classes per week and discusses many of the most sensitive issues of our times. At our two other sites we have teachers who also discuss the issues of our times and it is all tied together into an awareness of how we all treat one another and the importance of community. Under the umbrella of our No Place for Hate program we have involved all of our teachers and students and many of our parents in activities such as; Unity Day, Respect for All Week, Anti-Bullying Presentations, Cancer Awareness and Toys for Tots. The underlying theme that binds all of these programs and initiatives together is that we are never alone. As a school we must always work together to help and support one another and in turn make our communities caring places to live. Essential components of the school environment are staff, parent and community interactions, self-esteem, pride, mutual respect, orderliness and a commitment to excellence. Therefore, the parents, staff and community will work collaboratively to ensure that these components are actualized through the appropriate utilization of resources and support systems and the effective operation of the School Leadership Team. PS 235 - Janice Marie Knight Schools is committed to presenting educational programs that are designed to help each student develop personal knowledge, skills and competence to his or her maximum potential, and to establish behavioral patterns which will enable each student to become a responsible and contributing member of society. While at P.S.235 - Janice Marie Knight School we expect to assist students in developing and nurturing their individual abilities, with your support as your child’s parent/guardian, we also expect to help students achieve intellectual competence in the Common Core Learning Standards. The PS 235 - Janice Marie Knight School has a very stable staff and student body. Once registered in our school most children remain with us through their elementary years. This gives our staff the ability to be a steady part of their lives. It also allows us the opportunity to establish lasting relationship with their families. Our staff, at all three buildings, has been extremely stable. This stability allows our students to receive the benefits of years of professional development and experience. Our experienced staff works cohesively in many teams including Pupil Personal Team, 2018-19 CEP 10  Grade Leader Team, Inquiry Teams, Vertical Alignment Team and Administration Team. The teachers support one another always focusing on community and student needs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students in the Level 1 range have a specific need in ELA and Math Curriculum, standards and skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Effective School Leadership was a large part of this year’s initiative. With the retirement of two Assistant Principals and the hiring of 2 seasoned Assistant Principals the Administrative team was able to hit the ground running this past school year. The ability to attract experienced administrators speaks to the high expectations, dedication and hard work that is expected at PS/IS 235. This energy that is put forth daily helps to make our teachers more effective and students successful and prepared for college career and readiness . Through this leadership our Professional Learning has taken on a life of its own as the staff embraces many types of development all for the purpose of helping our students grow. As the population of our school continues to increase not only do we need to continue to impart a sense of community in our students but we must also focus on the academics. It is urgent that we pay attention to continued student growth as we must pay attention to specific areas of academic need. In particular our ELA and Math scores. It is only through Rigorous Instruction in a Supportive Environment can both students and staff members succeed in meeting their potential. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K235 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1254 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 49 31 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 20 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 60.8% % Reduced Lunch 1.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.5% 2.4% 1.5% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.82 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 69.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 25 95.0% 10.7% 8.2% 92.8% 1.3% 2.0% 6 7% 8.5 65.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School strengths relative to The 2017-2018 K-8 School data sources (state scores, internal testing, District testing) indicate that our Math scores continue to show positive growth in grades 4 through 8, , and our ELA scores continue to make positive gains in all testing grades. At the Lenox Academy MIddle School more students are now taking regents and successfully receiving High School credit. This includes the following Regents; Algebra 1, Living Environments, ELA and the Spanish Proficiency exam. This past year we were actively part of the districts second and fifth grade math Professional Development. In addition through a grant from Algebra for All we were able bring in a Math Staff Developer for staff development. She met with two cohorts of 7 teachers for 3 full days of math development in that area of Math Number talk. When analyzing our Grade 2 Math Beginning of year and End of year test there was significant growth in all classes in very many of the standards. The priority need is to continue our Math Professional Development in order to expose the staff and students to BEST PRACTICES in Math Talk. The relationship between understand and this training is both positive and undeniable. In addition we will be working with our PTA to offer workshops not only on Wednesdays but on Saturdays also. The goal is to increase parent involvement which will impact student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5a) Rigorous Instruction: By June 2019, 80% of all Level 1 students in grades 3-5 will make at least one years growth on the New York State Math Exam. Staff Development and aligned materials will be purchased to help students better understand the Mathematical concepts being taught and how to share it with the peers. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will meet in grade meetings and engage in grade rotation in which entire grades vertically meet to analyze student data and analyze curriculum focusing on math language, and problem solving as included in the Mathematical Practices Standards, particularly standards 1 - 4 & 7. Teachers plan lessons & Performance Tasks. Math Performance Tasks will be implemented three time during the course of the year. All students in grades 3-5 September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing SETSS, ICT and SWD teachers will monitor progress & update parents 3x a year (after the baseline, one formative & the summative assessment). Parents of SETSS, ICT & SWD students September, January, May Staff and the PTA will design and present workshops designed to engage families and support their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common core so families can support their children at home. These workshops will be given at various times so that all parents can attend. Planned times are Wednesday evenings and Saturdays. All parents will be targeted with an emphasis on the Level 1's. September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing All staff will be involved with revising and including more detail to the curriculum map based on knowledge gained through student test item analysis and Next Generation Common Core All students in grades K-5, including September 2018 - June 2019 SETSS & Ongoing SWD's. All classroom teachers in grades 3-5, teachers, administration, Math Staff Developer (dependent on funding) SETSS, ICT and SWD teachers All staff in grades PreK - 8, literacy and ULIT coach, SETSS & SWD teachers, Parent Coordinator, PTA and administration All staff in grades K-8, literacy coach, SETSS & SWD teachers and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support families understanding of rigorous instruction and the common core during the 18-19 school year we will be offering numerous parent workshops utilizing both school day, evening and Saturday times. In addition 2018-19 CEP 14  grade level workshops will be offered during parent engagement and before PTA meetings, We will also utilize the fall and spring family nights to provide information regarding rigorous instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include all staff members and workshops funded by both the school and the PTA. Instructional resources will include the online components of Go Math, Journeys, Ten Marks and iXL. Funding will come from Per Session, Fair Student Funding, Title 1 SWP and TL Data Specialist funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 students will have increased scores in ELA and Mathmatics by 10% based on unit and chapter tests.. Progress monitoring will take place in many forms during the school year. Baseline, Formative and a Summative testing will be done in ELA and Mathematics during the school year in grades 2-8. In February 2019 teachers will review unit and chapter tests to check for understanding. Performance tasks will be given throughout the school year including a midpoint ELA and Math task designed to evaluate students understanding of the skills and standards being taught. Item skills analysis and Looking At Students Work will take place during Professional learning to discuss Best Practices to increase student performance. Reading levels will be assessed informally every few weeks through classroom activities and through Renaissance Stars Literacy three times per year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will be using a Baseline, Formative and Summative tests in Mathematics that have been purchased from Curriculum Associates. we will be doing the same in ELA through an in house created test using questions from Engage NY. These twp assessments are designed to monitor the students progress throughout the year as they are exposed to the standards. We will be giving Performance Tasks in Math and ELA twice during the year to measure student understanding and delve deeper into the students thought processes. To measure students Reading Levels we will be using Renaissance STARS which is administered three times per year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Using data gathered from the OORS reporting system, occurrences have dropped significantly during the 2017-2018 school year. Our drop in occurrences has been achieved through a continued focus on the schools culture and environment. Our No Place for Hate program reaches over 750 students weekly and inspires our students to discuss, learn and accept others. We also work with Sanford Harmony and Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility to train our staff and students in Restorative Justice and Restorative 360. In addition we have a strong team of faculty and administrative staff who meet with students to deescalate and defuse any issues regardless of size before they get out of control. This level of communication and conversation makes for a very trusting environment that allow the students to approach and discuss anything that upsets them. Due to the stability of our staff the parents also have a level of trust the allows all of us to work together for the students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5b) Supportive Environment: By June 2019, through the use of Restorative Justice and RJ360, there will be a 20% decrease in student behavior occurrences in OORS level 3, 4 & 5 reporting as compared to the 2017 -2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increased focus on Danielson 3c - Engaging Students in Learning will be developed and incorporated into all lessons to minimize downtime in classrooms. Students will be more actively & intellectually engaged at all times. Students in grades K-8 Classroom discipline plans will include structures & consistent consequences. Teachers will create & monitor student behavior against established standards of conduct. Students will be aware of established standards of conduct & consequences in place. Students in grades K - 8 A behavior management system will be implemented in the lunchrooms. Students in grades K - 8. September 2018 - June 2019 During PL time on Mondays & Tuesdays September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing All teachers All teachers All staff, including Guidance & SBST & school aids. administration Restorative Justice will be introduced and used in all classes with a focus on grades 3 and 4. The S.E.A.L program (Self Enrichment & Leadership) will focus on anti-bullying & tolerance. Trips in grades 3 - 5 to the Indian Museum, African Burial Grounds & the Jewish Heritage Museum during the school year. Parents will be made aware of these established standards of conduct & consequences thereof. The creation & distribution of a School Handbook detailing school-wide discipline policies. During parent engagement, parents will be updated on their child's behavior. During the Fall Orientation parents will be given individual classroom policies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All parents September 2018 - June 2019 All staff, including Guidance & SBST & administration Ongoing How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 17  Through an on-going year long series of workshops given by staff members who excel in different social emotional and educational areas we will invite parents and guardians to be a part of the PS 235 family. Workshops will be given at various times to accommodate parent schedules. This will include Saturdays to reach parents who cannot attend weekday workshops. School personal include the Guidance Counselor, Reading and ULIT Coach, Highly Effective staff members, Parent Coordinator and Administration. Discussion with parents and guardians will help us learn what the needs of the parents are when preparing and selecting workshop topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include all staff members to make students aware of their actions. Funding will come from Per Session, Fair Student Funding, Title 1 SWP and the PTA. Instructional resources will include our the continued use of the Growth Mindset in grades 6-8. Our S.E.A.L will expand to more of our lower grades to help them understand what a No Place For Hate School means. Our revised Parent Handbook will allow the parents to better understand the goals of the school and invite them to more involved in it. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 Level 1 and 2 infractions will drop 10% based on the OORS Management tool. Review/discussion of OORS reports & all incidents during weekly cabinet meetings. We will be monitoring the occurrence reports and the level of the infractions as compared to previous years to assure that our incidents continue to decrease. It is important to continually monitor this so that if we see a pattern of occurrences we address them immediately. Conversation around Restorative Justice and Restorative 360 will be discussed Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Continued review of OORS reports, student observable behavior and information gleaned from Restorative Justice Circle conversations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During Professional Learning, Vertical and Grade Team meetings it was noted that students made progress and improved in both math and reading. The focus for this year will be to build on our math number talk initiative and continue to improve the students reading abilities continuing to close the gap. Teachers across the grades are working to provide instruction that targets the structure of writing and reading comprehension. Teachers continue to use uniform rubrics designed to help the students better understand what is expected of them in order to be a good readers. As the area of reading continues to be addressed the students are being exposed to more literature which is designed to increased their reading levels by various amounts. We continue to use Fundations in the CORE classrooms to includes grades K, 1 and 2. Many of the teachers have attended and more will be attending Wilson training to better understand how best to use the program in their classrooms. We are continuing to monitor the results to determine the impact Fundations is having on our lower grade students and whether the skills they are learning carry into the upper grades. We also use Fundation with our special education classes and for our ENL students with positive results. With the addition of a full time ULIT coach we are able to focus more on reading in grades K-2. Our ULIT coach works closely with the staff to introduce strategies designed to move students reading levels. Funding for this program has allowed us to purchase large amount of grade appropriate books for grades K-2 and myON for all students. Strengths : ● Teachers work collaboratively during Professional Learning to learn about Rigor, Student engagement and Differentiated Instruction. ● Teachers actively revise the ELA & Mathematics curriculum in order to create a viable curriculum map and pacing calendar based on best practices, student engagement and multiple entry points. ● Grade-level and vertical inquiry teams meet monthly to discuss student progress; identify strengths and areas of improvement, common trends and implications for teacher practice 2018-19 CEP 19  Needs : ● Further increase students’ reading levels through continued progress monitoring through the use of baseline, formative and summative assessments. As well as classroom assignments. Priority Need : The priority need for this goal is to increase achievement and comprehension is English Language Arts. as measured by the STARS Reading Assessment and State exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5c) Collaborative Teachers: By June 2019, 80% of students in grades K-5 will increase their reading levels a minimum of 3 letters as measured in STARS Reading. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In grades K - 2, basic phonics will be increased through an investment in classroom libraries, an emphasis on Literacy (Wilson and Fundations) and an increased exposure to Tier 1 and Tier 2 words allowing students to develop an increased vocabulary and the continued staff development by our ULIT K-2 Literacy Coach. All students in grades September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers of grades K - 2, ELL, SWD and SETTS students. K - 2 Grades 3 - 5 will engage in genre study during media/reading Periods. Students Grade 3- 5 Daily for 20 minutes September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing Specialized web based literacy software, myON, is being used in grades K - 5. Students The media/reading teacher Grade K-5 Teachers K-5 will work collaboratively in grade teams to look at student work, discuss Best Practices, strategies and analyze data Students K-5 September 2018 - June 2019 All teachers of grades K - 5 All teachers of grades K - 8 Teachers 6-8 will work collaboratively in vertical teams to look at student work, discuss Best Practices, strategies and analyze data Students 6-8 Ongoing Progress reports to parents regarding reading levels will be distributed triennially. All parents 3x per year All classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher-Parent Collaborations will be fostered through meetings with classroom teachers, coaches and in-depth discussions with SBST members. Through an understanding of educational strategies and their child's educational needs, parents will be better prepared to support their children at home. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include staff members, workshops and a more in-depth use of Wilsons Fundations through additional Professional Development. These programs will be funded through both school funds and workshops through the PTA. Instructional resources will include the online components of Journeys and myON. Funding will come from Per Session (Data Specialist) , Fair Student Funding and Title 1 SWP Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 teachers and parents will have increased conversation by 10% through parent-teacher conferences and Tuesday Parent Engagement. This year we will be sending report cards three times a year. With the use of STARS reading we will be sending out Reading Assessment Data to all parents grades K-5 with their report cards. This will increase parent/teacher communication allowing staff and parents to have greater communication. As the students work towards the second report card staff and parents will be able to measure their progress towards their individual year end goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress is measured during the school year thorough the use of Renaissance Stars Reading, Baseline, Summative and Formative exams, classwork and performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Danielson snapshots from the 2017 - 2018 school year all current staff received a rating of effective or highly effective after MOSL was calculated in, This year we will continue to focus on Danielson 3c - Engaging Students in Learning. This focus will cause an increase in student engagement increase multiple entry points and help teachers to adopt more best practices. This increase in pedagogy, growth in both ELA and Math, increased student time on task will also reduced student disruptions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5d) Effective School Leadership: By June 2019, there will be a continued increase in the number of teachers delivering highly effective instruction with an increased focus on Danielson 3c - Engaging Students in Learning as evidenced by teacher ratings at the end of the year as compared to June 2018. Focused Professional Learning will be the motivating factor enabling the change. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Rounds will be implemented. Teacher Teams will plan, observe & debrief lessons with a focus on Danielson 3c Engaging Students in Learning. Classroom & cluster teachers in grades K-5 September 2018 - June 2019 All teachers & administration Teachers will continue to understand how to use differentiated instruction in the classroom in order to create multiple entry points for the students and reach them in order to allow them to grow. Classroom & cluster teachers in grades K-5 All teachers & administration Ongoing during PL time on Mondays & Tuesdays September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing during PL time on Mondays & Tuesdays 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through workshops, informative PTA and SLT meetings parents will be introduced to supporting their children at home. A partnership with the DOE's new School Mental Health Consultants will offer parents workshops and resources designed to support and promote various types of family and parent engagement. These workshops will occur monthly beginning in October. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  Resources required to promote parent leadership and engagement to support their children will include all staff members. Funding will come from Per Session, Fair Student Funding, Title 1 SWP, Universal Literacy Coach funding and TL Data Specialist funds. The school community will be involved in this goal throughout the school year and will be revisited and discussed at all meetings including SLT, PTA and Cabinet meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Snapshots during the 2018 - 2019 school year will be monitored and discussed during weekly cabinet discussions. We will also have discussions with both our Reading and Universal Literacy Coach to discuss areas of strengths and needs that are being seen in individual classes, grades and school wide. Performance Tasks will continue to be revised and given by the grade level teachers in ELA and Math to measure student progress and understanding. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP with a focus on the implementation of differentiated insturction that supports Danielson 3C. How students are performing using the following measures: Renaissance Stars Reading, Baselines-Formative-Summative testing, performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Report, only 28% of parents responded to the survey. This is a decrease of 6% from the previous year. There has been an increase in Strong Family-Community Ties and Trust as seen in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. We have many initiatives that have been designed to increase parent involvement. These include a hands-on parent coordinator who is very involved with our parents, a continuously revised Parent Handbook to make our parents aware of many of the events this year and ways to contact the school, a wider array of using the Parent Engagement time to allow parents to attend more workshops in many areas all designed to help their children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5e) School Family-Community Ties: By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in the number of parent participating in parent workshops, parent conferences, PTA meeting and school events. This will be accomplished through the use of greater communication with the parents through newsletters, parent coordinator outreach letters, Reading workshops conducted by our ULIT Coach and a coordinated effort by all staff to create grade wide workshops that will be presented at different times so that more parents can attend. In addition we will have a Saturday PTA meeting 3X's during the school year to reach parents who are unable to attend during .weeknights. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Greater parent outreach through the use of telephone, text and letters. Especially regarding attendance for school events such as the 100 Day Olympics, Literacy Day, Art Show, Cancer Awareness, City Harvest, the Science Fair & the Anti-Bullying Fair. Volunteer outreach for all school events. The creation & distribution of a School Handbook detailing dates of parent workshops, parent conferences, PTA meetings & school events. Continued updating of PTA Facebook page. Parents A minimum of 4 parent workshops including Math, ELA, and Common Core. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018 - June 2019 All school staff, administration, PTA & SLT. Ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 Ongoing 2 of the 4 will be held in October & February Administration, PTA Parent coordinator & various teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The CBO's and Partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement include Breast Cancer Awareness, City Harvest, Toys for Tots, Brooklyn Garden Society, Unity Day, National Dance Institute, Theater for a New Audience, Symphony Space and SONYC after school program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, internet presence for staff, students and parents, workshops from both inside and outside sources. Resources will include all staff members and workshops funded by both the school and the PTA. Instructional resources will include parent training in Go Math, Journeys and myON. Funding will come from Per Session, Fair Student Funding, Title 1 SWP and TL Data Specialist funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 27  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the number of parent participating in parent workshops, parent conferences, PTA meeting and school events. This will be measured by the attendance during this years events as compared to the previous years. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance taken as meetings and events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -State ELA exam -STARS Reading level - ELA Baseline Assessments -teacher observations State Math exam -Math Baseline assessment -GoMath performance tasks, chapter tests and unit tests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Balanced Literacy : shared reading/writing, read aloud, interactive reading/writing, guided reading/writing, close reading Workshop Model -Whole group During and after school -Small group -RtI Tier I, II, II -Push-in, pull-out models for RtI and ENL services Whole group During and after school -guided practice -Small group -problem of the day -RtI Tier I, II, II -explicit modeling -strategy reteach-Tier I, Tier II -teacher observation -guided math Science Science state exam -Science unit tests -enrichment Teach, model, hands-on-experience, reteach, guided practice -Science performance task -teacher observations -Push-in, pull-out models for RtI and ENL services Whole group During school -Small group -RtI Tier I, II, II -Push-in, pull-out models for RtI and ENL services 2018-19 CEP 29  Social Studies Social Studies performance task -teacher observations Counseling, SETSS At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Balanced Literacy : shared reading/writing, read aloud, interactive reading/writing, reading/writing workshop, writing, close reading Combination of all above as strategies for individual students are explored Whole group During school -Small group -RtI Tier I, II, II -Push-in, pull-out models for RtI and ENL services Small group and individual During, and after school 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School Uniforms School supplies when needed: i.e.backpacks, notebooks, pencils, paper, erasers, post-its, etc. School trips     Resources for families  Metrocards/Bussing 35 students Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff will recruit excess staff from schools within the district & attend hiring fairs to identify & recruit highly-qualified teachers. ● Mentors and coaches support struggling & un-qualified teachers. ● PD regarding the Danielson Framework focuses teachers on best practices of instruction. ● The pupil personnel secretary will continue to work closely with our South Brooklyn appointed HR personnel to ensure that non-HQ meet all required documentation & assessment deadlines 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● PL will include study groups and grade conferences focused on Student Engagement, Rigor & Questioning. ● Discussion techniques and the Depth of Knowledge (DOK) matrix in study groups ● Analyzing data, map adjustments & vertical alignment ensure that all staff enable all students to meet CCLS Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 CEP 33  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). To ensure that our children have a smooth transition from prekindergarten into kindergarten, our pre-kindergarten team provides an environment that meets the social and emotional needs of the children through strong teacher collaboration and parental involvement. Our pre-kindergarten teachers work collaboratively. Each week during inquiry they have an opportunity to develop their units of study, look at student work and create different types of assessments that are used to monitor students’ growth. All lessons taught within the unit of study are aligned with the New York State Prekindergarten Foundation for the Common Core. Each lesson builds upon each other and learning centers are developed not to reinforce concepts are being taught in the classroom. Throughout each unit work samples are collected and assessments are administered in order to monitor children’s growth and are used to plan for upcoming lessons to meet the students’ needs. To encourage parental involvement, during each theme various home-school activities are sent home. This gives families the opportunity to work together on meaningful activities. In addition, parents are encouraged to take out books from the library which focus on the theme, this includes both fiction and non-fiction texts. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our curriculum maps, designed by teachers, have embedded performance tasks for each unit. In addition the programs we are using allow teachers to select from various types of assessments provided by these programs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2018-19 CEP 34 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A - 5E 5A - 5E 5A - 5E Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 687,484 82,574 0 0 7,202,000 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 35   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 235, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 235 - Janice Marie Knight School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.235 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 39  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 41  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Janice Marie Knight Borough Brooklyn School Number 235 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laurence Lord Coach Jennifer Balis ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gina Douglas Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Stephanie Mastropolo Superintendent Beverly Wilkerson Assistant Principal Carolann Thompson,Adrienne Wal Coach School Counselor Constance Johnson Parent Parent Coordinator Michele Cumbo Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette Fougere Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1217 2018-19 CEP 44 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Renaissance is used for all grades at P.S.23. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Differereniation instruction is used for all students including ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the students learning at the end of each unit. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 45  The teachers uses data to identify changes in instructional practices that will accelerate learning.The teachers and the ENL teacher works together to evaluate the needs of ELLs.The ELLs works in small groups with the ENL teacher .All data will be compared for growth, 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 235 will demonstrate learning through technical proficiency in areas including but not limited to maintenance of an electronic portfolio, or learning log, research on the internet and use of computers. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns on the NYSESLAT indicate that the students perform best on the speaking and listening sections and perform low on the reading and writing sections of the test, 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet to discuss data,teacher made tests,assessments, and writing pieces of ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program at P.S.235 the ELLs are grouped together heterogeneous (mixed proficiency levels).The instruction is delivered by differentiation . b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL program at PS 235 Entering(beginning) - 2 units of study per week Emerging (low intermediate- 2 units of study Transtioning/ Intermediate -1 unit of study 180 minutes. Expanding/ Advanced -1 unit of study 180 minutes. Commanding/ Proficient - former ELLs must continue to receive services for an additional 2 years 90 minutes. PS 235 does not have a TBE program or a DL program 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Beginning in the 2015-16 school year ELLS are required to receive all or part of their ENL through an integrated model, which refers to unit of study or its equivalent in which students receive core content are (English, language arts, math, science or social studies) and English language development instruction 2018-19 CEP 46  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Chinese Reading tests for ELLs in grade 3-12. This is for Chinese proficient students in Chinese DL program. El Examen de Lecture in Espanol (ELE) is given to all students in grades 3-12 in Spanish tranional bilingual education in dual language programs 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The differentiate instruction for SIFE are to receive literacy instruction and target mathematics intervention. They will receive AIS which provides targeted instruction in speaking listening, reading and writing. The differentiate instruction for the Newcomer is to utilized many different strategies and activities to ensure that ELLs learn their new language. The Developing ELL will have a balance literacy of guided and shared reading, and writing. The Long Term Ell will be a balanced literacy of shared and guided reading and writing, AIS, targeted instructions in math and ELA. The former ELLs up to two years after exciting ELL status will be offered ENL services. They will receive modified services up to 90 minutes of ENL instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs-SWDs are provided with sheltered instruction which includes visual, aids hands on materials, charts, graphic organizers, puppets, big books, computer instruction programs and books with tapes. Materials used: Fundations, Journeys, Go Math 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? For ELLs identified as having special needs; they will receive groups or individual counseling based on their individual needs. PS 235 ensures ELL SWDs receives all services by the number of different instructional strategies 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention program for ELLs are daily AIS periods for 25 minutes of small group instructions in ELA and math. Content areas of science and social studies takes place during the daily 90 minutes. Comprehension literacy block through small group guided session and center activities. The ELL subgroups targeted are newcomers( less than 3 years), SIFE, and ELLs after testing, proficient. The language that is used is English with native language support for challenging areas of instruction 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 235 will continue to use the Common Core Learning Standards 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELLs are included and invited to all programs at PS 235. There are no after school programs at PS 235 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ELLs are using technology to enhance their learning experience and develop reading skills 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 47  Native language support is delivered through other staff members, other students on the grade/ class that speak the language of the ELLs to support and help them. Dictionaries, glossaries, and bilingual books in the library are also helpful. There are no TBE or Dual Language programs at PS 235 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services are provided for ELLs on grade levels such as guidance counselor speech teachers, SETTS, and AIS providers . When needed native language support will be provided 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S 235 does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The principal gives tours of the school such as showing the lunchroom, the library, the auditorium, laboratories, outdoor and indoor lineup. Throughout the year as ELLs arrive:The ELL teacher and the classroom teacher should make the newly enrolled ELL a member of the class by introductions to the ELLs, a buddy system for native language support and show them different areas of the classroom 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NA 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Nov. 7,2017, June 8th 2017, Every Monday of the school year. Will discuss needs and the assessment all of students including ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS 235 will be provide professional development to all teachers and administrators to specifically address the needs of Ells. A minium of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instructions, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating and content instruction for ELLs 2018-19 CEP 48  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent workshops are conducted on topics such as parenting skills understanding educational accountability, grade level curriculum on assessment expectations, literacy, assessing community and support services, and student proficiency levels 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are PTA meetings “pajama night” where staff members read to the students. All parents are invited. There are workshops on the testing grades to discuss the state tests Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 49 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laurence Lord, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Laurence Lord Title Principal Carolann Thompson,Andrienne Wa Assistant Principal Michele Cumbo Parent Coordinator Gina Douglas ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Balis Coach Coach Constance Johnson School Counselor Beverly Wilkerson Soeurette Fougere Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Stephanie Mastropolo Other SETSS Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 51  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K235 School Name: Janice Marie Knight Superintendent: Beverly Wilkerson The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gina Douglas ENL teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification(HLIS) ATS System provides information of the primary language of the students(RHLA) Parent Coordinator interviews Informal oral communications with parents and teachers Attendance at PTA meetings We continously meet with ELL/LEP team to develop and if necessary revise the current plan to ensure that our school is addressing the needs of the Spanish, Haitian Creole, Arabic, and the Bengali parents 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 52  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Haitian Creole Spanish 26 5 17 4 1.37 0.26 0.9 0.21 28 5 18 4 1.48 0.26 0.95 0.21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? lunch forms Sept.2016 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All information will be in the parents preferred language(native language) for both written and oral communication. report cards Nov-Feb-Mar-June'16-'17 all parent correspondence Sept-June'16-'17 chancellor's regulations Sept'16-'17 " " " 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Night PTC PTC Meet and Greet Parents Sept 2016 Nov 2016 Mar 2017 Sept 2016 interpretation service(s)? use of phone call to the Translation and Interpretation Unit and school staff that speaks these languages " " 2018-19 CEP 53  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Phone call by office staff or parent coordinator ,text message by parent coordinator and a call to the Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist native speaking parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Through staff conferences -teachers will indicate which parent will need assistance with the translation unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent Bill of Rights Parents Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guide at the security desk and the main office. PS 235 will provide a welcome poster in the language of the parents Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent surveys that the parents fill out. Parent and teacher conversation PTA meetings. 2018-19 CEP 54 
