2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K243 School Name: P.S. 243K- THE WEEKSVILLE SCHOOL Principal: KAREN HAMBRIGHT-GLOVER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P. S. 243K-The Weeksville School 331600010243 Pre-K to Grade 5 1580 Dean Street 718-604-6909 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 16K243 718-604-6914 Fax: Karen Hambright-Glover khambri@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Karen Hambright-Glover Margarette Brevil-Portes Donnalyn Lamont Diane Lawrence Donnalyn Lamont N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 16 Rahesha Amon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue-Room 135 Superintendent’s Office Address: Brooklyn, New York, 11221 ramon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-2834 Phone Number: 718-935-2337 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North FSC Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3298 Phone Number: 718-935-2337 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KAREN HAMBRIGHT-GLOVER MARGARETTE BREVIL-PORTES DONNALYN LAMONT Marilyn Farmer DIANE LAWRENCE JOSEPHINE CORNEILLE DEVONA SEWNAUTH *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CHAIR PERSON/TEACHER Member/TEACHER Member/TEACHER 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TREINA MACKINS Daphney Borgella Jessie Arps Marilyn Farmer Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Weeksville Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of the Weeksville School is to produce literate, lifelong learners who are visionary and productive, aware of self, accepting of cultural differences, sensitive to others, and who apply knowledge to make morally responsible decisions in an ever-changing global society. We will accomplish this by providing a challenging, relevant, multicultural, integrated curriculum taught by a caring, competent, motivated, accountable staff, committed to the 2018-19 CEP 9  success of all students, in a safe, orderly environment conducive to learning in partnership with our entire parent community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 16K243 School Information Sheet School Configuration ( 2018-19) Grade Configuration Total Enrollment Types and Number of English Language Learner Classes ( 2018-19 ) 3K,PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 242 SIG Recipient # Transitional Bilingual N/A # Dual Language N/A # Self-Contained English as a Second Language Types and Number of Special Education Classes ( 2018-19 ) # SETSS 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching # Music # Dance N/A # Drama N/A # CTE # Special Classes 1 1 N/A Types and Number of Special Classes ( 2018-19 ) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language School Composition ( 2018-19 ) % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient Racial/Ethnic Origin ( 2013-14 ) % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White Personnel ( 2018-19) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) # of Deans (2014-15) 94.8% 96.9% 5.8% 0.3% 23.8% 0.3% 13 N/A Personnel ( 2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate (2018-19) % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience (2013-14) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools ( 2018-19) 0.3% N/A ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) 86% Student Performance for High Schools N/A ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Overall NYSED Accountability Status ( 2018-19 ) Reward In Good Standing N/A X N/A N/A 6 N/A N/A 90.2% 0.7% 27% 71.3% 4.2% N/A % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch % Students with Disabilities % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial # of Assistant Principals (2018-19) # of Counselors/Social Workers (2018-19) 1 2 % Teaching Out of Certification (2018-19) N/A Average Teacher Absences (2018-19) 10% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) 30% N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 N/A Recognition Local Assistance Plan 2018-19 CEP 10  Focus District Priority School AREA OF CELEBRATION X Focus School Identified by a Focus District Our proudest achievement is that as February 2016 our school was removed from the State Focus List. We are now a School in Good Standing. This was a collaborative effort between all of our stakeholders and we are proud of our work thus far. We also have many collaborations and initiatives that support our goals for student achievement and improved academic performance. Some of those listed have parent involvement components and some help to focus of improvement of pedagogy. In addition we have programs to support social-emotional development of our students. Many of them are listed below:  Power Play NYC  CookShop  Weeksville School Museum  Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams Technology Grant $200,000  Council Member Robert E. Cornegy NYC Council Participatory Budgeting Smart Boards for Smart Kids Smile Dental Program $320,000 Grant  Urban Leaders   Teaching Matters Literacy Support  National Training Network-Math  Power Brain  Matheletics  Weeksville School Warriors Basketball Team and Cheerleaders  Mighty Milers  Donors Choose  Yoga  Pre-K Program-Explore: Building Blocks  3K Program Supportive Environment 93% up from 79% in 2016-17  2017-18 NYC School Survey  Collaborative Teachers 94% up from 80% in 2016-17   Effective School Leadership 88% up from 63% in 2016-17   Trust 94% up from 75% in 2016-17 Strong Family-Community Ties 94% up from 83% in 2016-17 In reflecting upon the 2017-2018 school year, a considerable amount of strengths can be noted. A primary strength of the 2017-2018 school year was the professional development offered at grade level meetings and faculty meetings. Monthly faculty meetings were held to inform staff on the CEP goals and to work with staff toward accomplishing these goals, as well as to offer the foundation in training staff the RTI model and the Data Driven Instruction model. Grade level meetings offered a time to delve deeper into the RTI model and the Data Driven Instruction model. Grade level meetings were offered to all teachers in Pre-Kindergarten through 5th grade once per month, and were a time 2018-19 CEP 11  when staff members could examine student data and work with their colleagues to create data driven plans to increase student achievement. Grade level meetings yielded the concrete outcomes of: RTI/ AIS folder expectations, methods in the Data Driven Inquiry process, and action plans to increase achievement in specific concepts in the contents of English Language Arts and Mathematics. Another strength of the 2017-18 school year was the creation of multiple committees within the building, and the voluntary teacher participation within those committees. Committees created include: Weeksville Inquiry Team, ELA Action Team, NTN Math Action Team, Wellness Committee, Professional Reading Book Club. The progress and activities of these committees was reported at the monthly SLT meetings. A third strength of the 2017-18 school year was the steps taken toward increasing parental involvement. In an effort to increase parent involvement, a Weekly Community Meeting was started that helped us reach out to more families which motivated them to come and volunteer in classrooms, and to come to school-sponsored evening and day events. Increased parental involvement was also initiated by the mailing of 6 week progress reports, for all families of students in grades 3K through Grade 5. At Public School 243 we strive to have a collaborative environment where our students’ needs are met and they are actively engaged in their learning. We know that this is how students learn best. Being a NYC school we are aware of the Capacity Framework and understand the importance of the instructional core. Because of this belief, we have noted the importance of student discourse/discussion and the need for our teachers to be able to facilitate those very important conversations in the classroom. Our instructional focus for this school year is centered on student discourse and our work with Danielson component 3B: Question and Discussion Techniques. We work to promote: Small group instruction   Explicit Instruction Model Independent work   Teacher facilitation  Student discussion around tasks Teachers plan during common planning times and in teacher teams and in teacher grade bands. Teacher planning times include RTI planning to address multiple access points for ELLS, SWD and and Tier I students. We have an emerging Distributive Leadership system in place that we use to help us access and align our curriculum to the CCLS and ELA and Math instructional shifts. We have an assessment calendar that schedules and outlines the various assessments in literacy, mathematics and writing. This includes our periodic assessments as well as MOSL (Measures of Student Learning) and Fountas and Pinnell benchmark/running record analysis. Our instructional team and teacher teams along with the administrators create the calendar and the assessments. The data is reviewed after the assessment is given, analyzed (item analysis) and then we adjust the curriculum based on the results, if needed. In addition, there are classroom/teacher generated assessments in science and social studies as outlined by the core curriculum materials. As a result of our work, we can see that our teachers are becoming better at using data to plan and demonstrate the use of differentiated approaches with their students. This will help us better meet the needs of the students based on where they are as a result of looking closely at the data and student work products. 2018-19 CEP 12  We have many initiatives and structures that support the development of a strong school culture. We are also aware of the data around school culture as set forth in our 2017-18 School Survey Report. Our work for this school year is to improve the data through the implementation and monitoring of the data and making the necessary changes in community/parent/staff perception of our school. We set forth our expectations in documents such as: School uniform policy School Newsletters    REMIND APP  Monthly School Calendar  School Website/Twitter/Instagram and Facebook accounts In addition we have several clubs and initiatives that support the improvement of a strong school culture such as: Student Ambassadors   Community Meeting Fridays  Breakfast in the Classroom  Computer Lab  Promethan Boards in 100% of all classrooms  Desktop computers in every classrooms   Apple Notebooks in all Grade 3, 4 and 5 classrooms  Technology Grant from Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams  Lenovo Laptops in all Grade 1 and 2 classrooms IPADS from DISNEY Grant Our Parent Coordinator works with our parent body to ensure that we keep parent involvement at the focus with:  Parent Workshops  Parent Volunteers  Active PTA and School Leadership Team We assess the quality of our school culture with some of the following methods:  Teacher Needs Survey  Parent Needs Survey  Parent Concerns Sheet  Parent Workshop Exit Slip Some of our shared expectations across the school are: School Attendance: We expect students to come to school daily and come to school on time.   Weeksville Law: We expect all students, families and staff to be respectful, kind and responsible.  Instructional Focus: Teachers will work to improve and raise the level of high quality student discourse (student discussion) by facilitating lessons that guide students in thinking about what they say using metacognition and accountable talk across content and grade bands. We communicate those expectations to all of our school’s constituents by:  Weeksville Parent Handbook and Brochure  Weeksville Staff Handbook  Grade Newsletters 2018-19 CEP 13   Weeksville School Website  Remind App  Weeksville Law back pack letters School Goals   Grade Goals  CEP Goals We host a variety of school events and communication tools to communicate and meet with our parents and community. We have Open House-Meet the Teacher the Night, Report Card Night, Promotional Progress meetings in May, IEP Meetings, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Progress Reports three times a year (October, January, May), School Website, Remind App, Middle School Fair and Visits, College and Career Fair. We strongly support a positive and welcoming school learning environment. We are working to ensure that our environment speaks to our open door policy and that our parents feel welcome to enter the building and speak to any staff member. Students feel welcome and know they can talk to and trust at least one adult staff member in the building. (2016-17 Quality Review Report)   Area of Celebration  4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. (PPR MOLP Strengths 2017-18)    1.3 Resource Allocation  The principal strategically uses available funding to support professional development initiatives such as National Training Network and Teaching Matters, in addition to providing funding for curriculum supports. In addition, administration has recognized the importance of providing staff with time for common planning in the hopes of ensuring an alignment of curricula and instructional strategies.  3.1 Goal Setting  The administrative team's work with the FSC has given a foundational platform for the establishing of concrete goals and an instructional focus. Data was used to formulate these goals and they are in place, however more communication is needed from administrators with the staff as to how they will collaboratively get the work done. In moving practice forward, it is highly recommended that administration work with a team of teachers or establish a teacher leadership pipeline as a means of promoting shared and distributive leadership toward school improvement planning. AREAS OF NEEDED IMPROVEMENT: PPR MOLP 2016-17 1.1 Curriculum There is evidence of curriculum purchases to support the instructional focus of the school and the school's articulated work around integration of the instructional shifts, however as indicated by the administrator, the unpacking of the curriculum has not occurred yet in this 16-17 school year. It is not feasible that students will engage in rigorous tasks if the pedagogues have not yet engaged in unpacking the curriculum and using that work to look at student work and plan units of study that will address the identified needs of students. In addition to the observation/classroom visit 2018-19 CEP 14  process, administration must develop a methodology to assess the rigor and feasibility of curricula and classroom tasks. 1.2 Pedagogy In the first PPO visit several areas of need were identified that would necessitate a plan of action from administration geared to improving classroom pedagogy, classroom discussion was minimal, teacher domination was evident, there was a lack of differentiation and very little teacher feedback displayed on student work. These inconsistencies were noted to give administration some next steps to focus on with the administrative and instructional teams. There was little or no improvement in this area and these needs are still evident during classroom visits. 2.2 Assessment There is evidence of a building assessment calendar and the administrator is working to establish coherence for what assessments are to be administered, when and where. Some work has been done at the class/grade level with rubrics, however there is no clear common use of rubrics that will establish coherency in this assessment area. It is suggested that administration work with teachers to establish some school-wide or grade level "checks for understanding" that will be implemented across grades to establish a coherent structure for assessment. This will make it easier to monitor what is being taught and the level of impact indicative at each grade level. Also, it would be beneficial to design an assessment mechanism that addresses the instructional focus to determine what the next steps might be around moving that work forward. (2016-17 Quality Review Report) 1.2 Pedagogy Although teachers provide opportunities for students to attempt rigorous tasks and take part in group activities and discussions, across classrooms teaching practices inconsistently challenge, engage, and provide multiple entry points into the curricula. 2.2 Assessment Although teachers create rubrics, across grades and content areas, practices reveal their inconsistent use, as is the case for checks for understanding. Teachers are provided with actionable feedback regarding student achievement, but feedback provided to students regarding their academic accomplishments inconsistently contains actionable next steps. 1.1 Curriculum Curricula and academic tasks unevenly include rigorous tasks requiring higher-order thinking skills and consistently lack accessibility for a variety of learners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 CEP 15  English Language Learners (ELL) ELL Special Education (Total students with IEPs excluding PreK) Percent of students with IEPs at this school who: 0 0% receive Related Services only spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 4 6.15% spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 1 1.54% spend >60% of their week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes received Self-Contained services >60% of the week records in progress 44 67.69% 16 24.62% 0 0 65 26.86% 13 5.37% We are concerned about needs of our SWD students, and best practices in differentiating instruction to SWD students. It is critical to incorporate the school needs that are to the existing program, including: time required for differentiated instruction, strategies for ensuring educational equity for SWD students, mainstreaming SWD students with genereal education students and guidelines for students exiting the special education program. These teachers will benifit from specialized and focused professional development in the following areas: Writing Process, in an effort to introduce a common writing practice across grade levels within the school; Ways to increase student engagement, in an effort to move away from independent seat work within classrooms; and Flexible grouping, in an effort to promote integration of SWD students with their general education peers. Another need of the school that will benefit this sub-group of students lies in collaboration and planning. A primary necessity within this need is common planning time for classrooms where there is a co-teacher both in special education and ESL. Allowing for this common planning time will allow for the implementation of lessons where both teachers are integrated and have equal roles within the classroom. Within the need for collaboration and planning also lies the need for vertical and horizontal planning for staff. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Element of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school made the most growth during the 2017-18 school year: Statement of Practice 4.2: 4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning Key Areas of Strength: The Weeksville School has several teacher teams that consistently meet on a weekly basis. The teams follow an established protocol that requires them to review, reflect, brainstorm, and then come to a consensus around implementation of an adjustment to a highlighted teacher practice based on revealed needs of students. The observed fourth and fifth grade team concentrated on both student writing and how student discourse could be used to impact improvement. Teachers, after closely observing students during classroom discussions, reviewed their written work for their opinions expressed. Teachers’ reflection and brainstorming revealed the need for 2018-19 CEP 16 differentiation in student discussion procedures in order to successfully include a variety of learners. An action plan was created to adjust teacher practice to support students with different learning styles, using various teaching methods. Area of DTSDE Tenet in which the school was rated “Developing” during the 2016-17 school: Statement of Practice 1.1 : 1.1 Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards Key Areas of Focus: Curricula and academic tasks unevenly include rigorous tasks requiring higher-order thinking skills and consistently lack accessibility for a variety of learners. Statement of Practice 1.2: Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products Key Areas of Focus: Although teachers provide opportunities for students to attempt rigorous tasks and take part in group activities and discussions, across classrooms teaching practices inconsistently challenge, engage, and provide multiple entry points into the curricula. 2018-19 CEP 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K243 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 227 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 23 23 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 27 14 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.5% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.2% 19.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.09 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 76% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 41 14 89.1% 1.8% 29.5% 72.7% 4.8% 2.6% 2 4% 1.5 31.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reflecting upon the 2017-2018 school year, a considerable amount of strengths can be noted. A primary strength of the 2017-2018 school year was the professional development offered at grade level meetings and faculty meetings. Monthly faculty meetings were held to inform staff on the CEP goals and to work with staff toward accomplishing these goals, as well as to offer the foundation in training staff the RTI model and the Data Driven Instruction model. Grade level meetings offered a time to delve deeper into the RTI model and the Data Driven Instruction model. Grade level meetings were offered to all teachers in Pre-Kindergarten through 5th grade once per month, and were a time when staff members could examine student data and work with their colleagues to create data driven plans to increase student achievement. Grade level meetings yielded the concrete outcomes of: RTI/ AIS folder expectations, methods in the Data Driven Inquiry process, and action plans to increase achievement in specific concepts in the contents of English Language Arts and Mathematics. Another strength of the 2017-18 school year was the creation of multiple committees within the building, and the voluntary teacher participation within those committees. Committees created include: Weeksville Inquiry Team, ELA Action Team, NTN Math Action Team, Wellness Committee, Professional Reading Book Club. The progress and activities of these committees was reported at the monthly SLT meetings. A third strength of the 2017-18 school year was the steps taken toward increasing parental involvement. In an effort to increase parent involvement, a Weekly Community Meeting was started that helped us reach out to more families which motivated them to come and volunteer in classrooms, and to come to school-sponsored evening and day events. Increased parental involvement was also initiated by the mailing of 6 week progress reports, for all families of students in grades Pre-Kindergarten through 5. Area of Weakness ( Quality Review 2016-17-Statement of Practice 1.1-Curriculum) Findings Curricula and academic tasks unevenly include rigorous tasks requiring higher-order thinking skills and consistently lack accessibility for a variety of learners. Impact 2018-19 CEP 19  Students with disabilities and English Language Learners (ELLs) are inconsistently ensured access to engaging and rigorous curricula in all subjects and content areas. Supporting Evidence  The chosen formal curricula including, ReadyGen, Go Math!, and EngageNY for literacy, math, and science, and Pass Port for social studies, are all aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and emphasize rigorous tasks requiring higher-order thinking skills. However, these tasks appear inconsistently in school created curriculum maps, unit plans, and lesson plans across the grades and content areas. Lesson plans for some math, science, social studies, and literacy classes included opportunities for students to turn-and-talk and then share their thinking with their classmates while working in pairs, groups, and with the whole class. Students were also required to support their findings with facts and quotes from the text. A science lesson plan included a KWL chart, which required students to reflect on their prior knowledge, discuss the new material, and create a hypothesis for future learning. In contrast to planned tasks that require the use of critical thinking skills, preparation of a social studies lesson lists teacher-led reading of text, and the asking and answering of level one questions provided in the social studies textbook as the main class activity. Student tasks that emphasized higher-order thinking and/or rigor were not represented.  Math lesson plans, on all grade levels, consistently reflect planning as per the evaluation of student work and analysis of data to provide differentiated tasks and materials so students with disabilities would be engaged and have access to rigorous tasks. A fourth grade ICT lesson plan listed a place value chart and differentiated word problems as tools for allowing students with disabilities access into the task. In addition to varied and leveled questions, third grade and fifth grade lesson plans included assorted plans for work products as a way to ensure that struggling students are engaged with the same-leveled math material. However, some literacy, science, and social studies lesson and unit plans did not document questions, materials, or tools that reflected planning allowing all students access to cognitively challenging activities.  Although some lesson plans clearly documented guidelines and directions for paraprofessionals to support students with disabilities, the curricula and academic tasks rarely reflected specific planning so that these students could access and cognitively engage in the activity. Guidelines for paraprofessionals that were present in some lesson and unit plans for students with disabilities were missing for paraprofessionals assigned to students learning English. Furthermore, curricula did not reflect precise planning to provide these students access to the planned academic assignments. Needs: ● Promote greater consistency in differentiated instruction to reflect purposeful groupings, suitable challenges and questioning that extends critical thinking to maximize learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 20  By June 2019, 75% of teachers will design comprehensive unit plans with pacing calendars that provide the necessary steps and processes to support planning rigorous instruction in order to provide a coherent structure for teachers to ensure coverage of the CCLS and adherence to the instructional shifts as measured by the higher level tasks that will be evident thoroughly in lessons across the grades. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students and teachers Sept 2018 June 2019 in K- 5 Principal  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue to revise curriculum units and lesson plans to include rigorous learning experiences that actively involve students in their own learning:  Quality (rich) task/activities that challenge student to think Entry points and extensions for all student subgroups (high/low/medium/SWD/ELL students)  Connections to other ideas and concepts in the same curricular area/across curricular areas or to real life experiences.  Critical thinking skills including reasoning and making sense  Multiple paths to solve problems/find solutions 2018-19 CEP 22 K-5 Teacher Leaders Sept 2018 June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Grade Level Teacher Teams Grade Level Teacher Teams, Focus Groups, Lead Teachers Revise pre-determined formative assessments throughout the unit to insure rigor so that teachers can accurately determine what students have learned in relation to targeted standards in the unit. This will allow teachers to plan lessons according to students' needs. Building level teacher leaders will coach grade teams in unit mapping and engage in vertical curriculum review of grade level Standards/Content and review of student work using an agreed protocol. Monday Professional Development period will be utilized for curriculum mapping as well as professional development in: using protocols for productive meetings; team building; lesson study/instructional strategies based on individual teacher needs; Using student data to revise lesson plans; professional sharing of Best Practices; and other needs identified in teacher surveys or lesson observation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Timeline: Sept 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel: Literacy/Math Coach, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator Monthly Presentations on the Common Core, Monthly Workshops on Rigorous Instruction which will include videos detailing the Danielson Frameworks to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consolidated 2018-19 CEP 23  Tax Levy, Title I SWP and Title II- A a funds will be utilized for school personnel and substitute teachers and purchase of paper, experience charts, markers and other tools for tea2018-19 CEP 24  cher preparation, professional development materials and parent engagement fliers and curriculum workshops. School faculty, Principal, Assistant Principal and NTN will 2018-19 CEP 25  be responsible for implementing the action plan for this goal. Principal will submit request for calendar days for extended time in planning/revising units. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 2018-19 CEP 26  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Implement a classroom observation schedule to monitor the quality of teaching and learning. Provide thorough written feedback for all formal observations including clear targets for improvement. Follow up observations will be included to monitor progress. The school leaders will strategically use student data over time, feedback from formal and informal observations, and professional development opportunities connected to improvement plans and conversations to assess and adjust supports provided to teachers and other staff members Increase RIGOR in the classrooms through frequent observations and deliberate, timely feedback both oral and written . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School devised checklist/rubric for guiding unit planning and assessing whether attributes identified in the goal and action plan are included in revised units. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ( Quality Review 2015-16-Statement of Practice 3.4-High Expectations) Findings: The Weeksville school is currently developing methods of communication to consistently deliver messages of high expectations to parents and students. Impact The school is in the process of developing ways to communicate with parents both high academic expectations and how to provide support for their children. Some students are receiving messages of high expectations and guidance on preparation for the next academic level. Supporting Evidence  Parents receive handouts, a monthly newsletter, and have the option to meet with teachers face to- face every Tuesday afternoon for information on the progress of their children. Although each parent spoke to specific needs, strengths, and weaknesses of his/her child, very few were able to speak to examples of support they received on how to get their children to the next academic level. A fifth grade parent received instructions on how to access academic websites that students use in school to check progress and how to support her daughter’s reading and writing. A prekindergarten grandparent explained that parents are expected to prepare pre-kindergarten students by making sure they are able to recognize the letters of the alphabet and write their own names. To support this process, school leaders and staff members spoke about workshops and learning opportunities that are currently under development that would provide information to family members on ways to specifically support their children’s progress to the next academic level. Fifth grade students stated that they must be able to use the S.O.L.V.E procedure to solve math problems so they will be ready for algebra in middle school. Fifth grade students also spoke about the importance of details in writing, supporting their opinions with quotes and text, and understanding vocabulary in preparation for sixth grade work. Although fifth grade students were able to speak about supports and messages received from guidance counselors and teachers that prepared them for the next academic level, second, third, and fourth grade students were not. Teaching practices, guidance counselor procedures, assemblies, and guidelines for group work and classroom activities are currently being reviewed, discussed, and adjusted to achieve successful communication of expectations to all other grade levels.  2018-19 CEP 28 Some grade five students stated that the one to four scale on the rubrics they use in ELA and math reminds them of what they should be aiming to achieve on their next attempt at the same skill. Another fifth grader stated, “A 2 is OK, but my teachers and my mom expect me to do better.” A third fifth grade student explained the process of receiving “Right Now’s” and “Next Steps” and how they are expected to apply the “Next Steps” in their new work. A number of students, from across the grades, also spoke of a color-coded system where “Red means you are struggling and don’t understand, yellow means you understand some of it, and green means you are doing well.” More than one student expressed how they are expected to work very hard to reach or maintain the green level.  Needs: ● The school needs to continue to make deliberate and effective efforts to make its core ethical values, the justification for them, and their behavioral definitions widely known throughout the school and parent community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will continue to build upon a culture for high academic achievement through our weekly community meetings, indicating more than 80% of teachers achieving the rating of effective or highly effective in Advance Domain 3: 3C Engaging Students in Learning. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff developers from Power Brain will work with select teachers each Monday through coaching, co-teaching and modeling lessons. This staff developer will also train a select group of students as peer mediators. Pk-5 students Sept 2018 Teachers June 2019 Administration and Power Brain staff developers from and Teacher Grade Leaders The school will implement a peer mediation program this school year. The Child Study Team will meet weekly to plan activities and begin the development of the school wide discipline plan that will incorporate all students needs including ELLs, and SWD. The Child Study Team will be made up of teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, including the guidance counselor, school based staff developer, parent coordinator, representatives from the lunch staff and the staff developers from Power Brain. Review, revise and articulate the Brain Power approach and other positive language that will be used by all constituents throughout the school. Pk-5 students Sept 2018 Administration Teachers June 2019 2018-19 CEP 30 All staff PD in November on update Brain Power system-staff will be trained and able to articulate and internalize updated Brain Power expectations. Launch the update Brain Power system in January 2018 with expectations for all facets of the day, ex. hallways, classrooms, voice level, etc. Establish a ladder of referral to enforce consequences for student infractions. Pk-5 students Sept 2018 Administration June 2019 Child Study Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Presentations, Workshops, Videos on Social Emotional Learning by Brain Power, Sept 2018-June 2019, IEP Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Power Brain Leaders, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consolidated Tax Levy, Title I SWP, and Title II- A will be utilized for acq2018-19 CEP 31  uiring substitute teachers, and for the purchase of supplies and materials for teacher preparation implementation of instruction, professional development materials and parent 2018-19 CEP 32  engagement flyers and workshops. Our school faculty, Principal, Assistant Principal, and Brain Power Program Leader will facilitate the implementation of this goal. The daily 2018-19 CEP 33  school program and Extended Day Professional Development Program will reflect time for cluster teacher collaboration. Substitute teachers will be utilized for coverage during 2018-19 CEP 34  professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a midyear assessment of OORS report data will reflect a decrease in the number of occurrences of minor and major infractions in OORS reports from September-February by 12%. By June 2019, an end of year assessment of OORS report will reflect a decrease in the number of occurrences of Level 3 infractions in OORS reports from February-June by 25%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, the School Leadership Team will assess the quantity and quality of program delivery thorough a survey of teachers and students and review of the incidents in the OORS system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ( Quality Review 2016-17-Statement of Practice 1.2-Pedagogy) Findings Although teachers provide opportunities for students to attempt rigorous tasks and take part in group activities and discussions, across classrooms teaching practices inconsistently challenge, engage, and provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Impact Student work products and discussions by all learners reflect uneven levels of higher-order thinking skills and participation. Supporting Evidence  The practice of providing multiple entry points into the curricular was inconsistently demonstrated across classrooms. In a fifth grade math class, students were purposefully divided into three heterogeneous stations according to the fluency they demonstrated on the particular multiplication skill being taught. There were three levels of activities at the first two stations, which provided appropriate challenges for advanced, on-track, and struggling students. Students at the third station were provided with individually paced enrichment assignments that were accessed by using Mathletics software on desktop computers. Additionally, the students at station one were required to use study the problem, organize the facts, line up a plan, verify a plan of action, and examine the results (S.O.L.V.E) to decipher word problems while students at station two used multiple strategies to solve word problems that required multiplication of multi-digit numbers by multi-digit numbers. In a pre-kindergarten science class, however, all students were led as one group in singing “My Five Senses” and continued as a group in reading the My Five Senses book. Student participation and engagement revealed multiple levels of understanding the five senses and how they are experienced; however, instruction, materials, and work product were not varied or adjusted to allow access for all learners.  Although the teacher of a kindergarten class attempted multiple Common Core-aligned practices, students were inconsistently engaged and displayed uneven demonstration of critical thinking skills by a lack of responses and completion of the connected classroom activity. For example, the teacher modeled the use of a four-point checklist so students would be able to self-assess their class work. Five of the fifteen students were able to successfully check off all four items on the list and demonstrate their understanding of the self-assessment practice. Four out of the fifteen students were able to verbally demonstrate their 2018-19 CEP 36   thinking when challenged to critically think of what would happen to a squirrel if it were unable to return to its home before the winter. The turn and-talk discussion before the share out of the fate of the squirrels revealed an inconsistency of the students’ engagement. Two of the seven small groups and pairs were consistently on task and able to demonstrate their understanding of the turn-and-talk process when prompted by the teacher, while the five other groups consisting of eleven students were not. Their lack of achievement of the learning task was not addressed during the fifteen minutes of observation. Students in a grade four/five ICT class were asked to provide an action or a quote to show that the English witches in The Witches, by Robert Dahl, were mean, unkind, and angry. Although some students provided actions, such as turning children into fleas and slugs to show the witches as unkind, the students were limited in exploring the deeper meaning of the witches’ choices. Through direct questioning from the teacher, three of the sixteen students were able to show their thinking and participate in a discussion, which revealed the diabolical reasoning behind the witches’ choices. The opportunity for the students to discuss the actions of the characters and then reach conclusions about the reasons behind them was inconsistently available to all in the class. Needs: Improve alignment of assessment practices, including ongoing checks for understanding, to determine student progress towards goals and provide effective feedback to students about their work to inform planning and preparation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teacher teams will actively participate in at least 3 professional learning cycles which will result in an increase in student progress as evidenced by a 20% increase in mastery of selected standards on the 4 week cycle of interim assessments in ELA and Math up from 10% during the same time last school year. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). This will be achieved by utilizing data from the pre and post on demand assessments and disaggregating the data using a data tool to determine which portion of the rubric needs to be focused on. Instructional team members will guide the work of teacher teams to state a common goal and use the goal to develop teaching points that will be used in alignment with shifts in instructional practices and student work will be used to determine next steps for instructional practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Grade Band Leaders, Administration Nov 2018-June 2019 Administration Lead Teachers Teacher Teams Grade Band Teams Teacher Teams Grade Band Teams How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator P.S. 243K will host School Crawl in September 2018 outlining curriculum, classroom practices and routines as well as introduce parents to our community partners and CBO’s. 2018-19 CEP 38  -Parents will participate in Open School Week (November 2018) where they will observe classroom teachers conducting math and literacy lessons -Teachers will inform parents of student’s academic progress in math and literacy via the following: Beginning of the year and Mid-year progress reports, report cards, Parent-Teacher conferences, school planners, “Week In Review” goal setting notebooks -We will provide a workshop/information session in Math and Literacy on December 2018 providing parents with strategies on how they can reinforce and enrich their child’s Math skills at home. -Parents were given access to READYGEN and Go Math’s online resources to support their children in math and literacy at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consolidated Tax Levy, Title I SWP and Title II- A will be utilized for school personnel on Galaxy TO and substit2018-19 CEP 39  ute teachers, and the purchase of supplies and materials for teacher preparation; professional development materials; and parent engagement flyers and curriculum workshops2018-19 CEP 40  . School faculty, Principal, Assistant Principal will facilitate the implementation of this goal. The school Program and Extended Day Professional Development Program will refl2018-19 CEP 41  ect blocks of time for teacher collaboration. Substitute teachers will be utilized for coverage during professional development, inter visitation, and collegial demonstration as 2018-19 CEP 42  needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, teacher teams will review pre on demand assessments for the first unit of study and target the lowest rated component of the Writing Fundamentals data tool and review lesson plans to incorporate teaching points for the lowest rated components. The students will then take an on demand post assessment after the unit of study and we will see a student achievement increase on the assessment by 10% as a result of the cycle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Writing Fundamentals data collection tool will be used as the assessment measure for student increase of writing performance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ( Quality Review 2016-17-Statement of Practice 4.1-Teacher Support and Supervision) ) Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection Findings School leaders provide feedback to staff that include strengths, challenges, next steps, and suggested professional development to support the progression of observed practices to align with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. School leaders meet regularly to review observation data and make professional development decisions. Impact Frequent feedback to teachers provides clear expectations and focuses on teacher development. Professional development opportunities are the result of informed decisions by school leaders. Supporting Evidence  Using their iPads, school leaders send teachers immediate feedback via email as they exit a formal or informal observation. The principal and assistant principal follow up in a timely manner with the official write-up providing not only viewed strengths and challenges but also expectations and recommendations for professional development to support the growth of teacher practice. Review of several write-ups revealed school leaders highlighting practices such as print rich classrooms, use of technology, providing extension work, redirecting students after technological malfunctions with class materials, and thoughtfully organizing instructional groups for maximum learning. Some challenges brought to the staff’s attention were the use of support staff, classroom management, transitions from one class activity to another, and lack of differentiation in tasks.  Presentations of all strengths and challenges in teacher practice were accompanied by the observing school leader’s expectations for continued implementation of a best practice or a needed pedagogical adjustment. For example, a teacher who was praised for celebration of student work displayed both inside and outside of her classroom was encouraged to continue ensuring that all displayed work includes a task 2018-19 CEP 44   and visible comments. A concern raised about students sharing books was followed by information regarding an ample supply of the books in a nearby classroom to preclude students from having to share and not have access to the materials. In response to review of student work and the results of benchmark assessments, combined with data from Advance, which revealed a need for support in the teaching of writing, school leaders implemented the Schoolwide Writing Fundamentals workshop for all teachers. Sessions were implemented during blended grade team meetings of kindergarten and grade one, grades two and three, and grades four and five. The use of student benchmark results and the most recent data from Advance are under review to determine the impact of the professional learning and to identify the focus for professional learning for unit two. Needs: ● Develop a system of checkpoints to measure progress toward school-wide interim and long-term goals in order to adjust and ensure student performance. ● Use observation protocols to assess and improve teaching practices that lead to student progress and achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that incorporates culturally relevant educational practices which will build teacher capacity to design learning tasks that are rigorous and challenge students to think deeply and explain their thinking as measured by a 20% increase in observation ratings of effective on component 3C of the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric, Engaging Students in Learning. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development,  and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018-2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Teacher Leaders Family workshops are scheduled a minimum of twenty times during 2017-2018 school year to be facilitated by the Literacy Coach and/or the National Training Network staff developers, teachers, parent coordinator and administrators that will engage parents and guardians in activities that help them understand the CCLS academic and NYS testing program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I, Tax Levy and Title IIA monies will be used to ensure professional development is supported by Teaching Matters, The National Training Network. Title I money will be used to fund per session days in order for teachers to participate in professional development opportunities after school to adopt rigorous CCLS aligned curricula and tasks, and to plan for implementation of the tasks, to analyze the student data using teacher designed rubrics, and to use their analyses to inform future planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 46  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After each monthly round of Advance data being entered from teacher observations taking place, administrators will access the data and determine the instances of effective ratings in domain 3C before and after professional development is offered. The first round will be completed by the end of October and the 2nd round of Observations will be completed by the the end of December. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data will be used to determine whether or not the goal was met. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Quality Review: October 17th-18th, 2017 Strengths: ● Relationships across the school are warm, supportive and inclusive of students, teachers and parents who take pride in being part of the community. ● Parents have opportunities to be involved in their children’s learning through open communication with the school and engagement in the decision making process ● In addition to promoting an “open door” policy, school leaders and teachers communicate regularly with parents through the school’s website, workshops, curriculum night, and informal conversations. Quarterly reports sent home inform parents of their children’s progress. Consequently, parents are able to intervene, when necessary, to ensure their children make the needed adjustments to achieve in school. Needs: ● Our priority is to continue to improve on structures that would result in staff working closely with parents and the community by extending learning activities beyond the walls of the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be an increase of 30% in the number of parents in attendance at Monthly Parents meetings, school wide performances, Family Literacy, Math, Arts and Science Events, and classroom events and a 10% increase in the number of times parents report being invited to school on the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop and articulate expectations of participation in contests, home school projects, and other extended learning activities that support academic skills. Parents Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, School Social Worker, SLT, PTA Weeksville Website is translatable through 20 languages-Workshops to alert our families to this. (Global Connection) Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Remind App Plan and implement family events to coincide with PTA meetings Pre-K-5 Sept 2018 Involve the PTA and SLT in promoting monthly challenges and award contestants and winners at PTA meetings. students, parents and staff June 2019 Staff/ Sept 2018 Parents June 2019 Advertise contest and announce reminders of due dates Parents Sept 2018 Students June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, School Social Worker, SLT, PTA Administration, Parent Coordinator, School Social Worker, SLT, PTA Administration, Parent Coordinator, School Social Worker, SLT, PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brain Power, NY Cares, Interfaith Hospital, Big Brothers and Big Sisters, Fuel Up to Play 60, Publicolor, Rise Up and Walk,School Crawl Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 49  Consolidated Tax Levy, Title I SWP and Title II-A funds will be utilized for the purchase of supplies and materials for teacher preparation implementation of instruction, professional development materials and pare2018-19 CEP 50  nt engagement fliers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 80% of all students would have participated in one home-school parent activity as evidenced by sign-in sheets, exit slips and the parent survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of notes, school created parent survey and attendance at PTA meetings, checklists and attendance sheets from the Parent Engagement Tuesdays to determine success and adjustments as needed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 51  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assessment data is also used to identify students needing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and enrichment. As a result of the analysis of assessments, monthly analysis reports are created to help tailor instruction to meet the academic needs of our students using differentiated strategies. Item analyses are reviewed with various tests. Teachers use these data to set goals with students and set up small groups. We also use these analyses to integrate the school wide teaching strategy of Instruct-Practice-Evaluate (IPE), which enhances instruction Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) New York Strategy-Specific Reading Kit- This gives students the extra instruction and practice they need to master important skills. Easy for teachers to use with a built-in pacing chart and lesson plans Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group with AIS Teacher During the day Small group with classroom or AIS Teacher Small group with teacher Small group -2 classes per grade Quick diagnosis followed by targeted and scaffold instruction Small group or 1:1 Tutoring Built-in assessment tracks progress and skill mastery Test simulation experience boosts student confidence I-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction- precisely pinpoint student needs and accelerate learning with a powerful online program customized for every student. The all-new I-Ready Diagnostic & Instruction is an effective 2018-19 CEP 52  Mathematics combination of adaptive diagnostic assessment, engaging differentiated instruction, and instant reporting. Wilson Reading Program -This is an intervention tool for teaching decoding encoding and fluency. Special education teachers provide 45 minute lessons, 5 times a week, to students in grades 3-5. Great Leaps - This is a supplemental intervention tool for practicing basic math skills. Lessons are 10-15 minutes, one to one. This service is provided by trained math enrichment and support teachers and educational assistants. It is used to support students in grades 2-5. ●Targeted Mathematics Intervention is a program that focuses on “real-life application, vocabulary connections, cooperative learning and concrete models. This service is provided by in-school service providers for 30-45 minutes, 5 days a week in small Assessment data are also used to identify students needing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and enrichment. As a result of the analysis of assessments, monthly analysis reports are created to help tailor instruction to meet the academic needs of our students using differentiated strategies. Item analyses are reviewed with various tests. Teachers use these data to set goals with students and set up small groups. We also use these analyses to integrate the school wide teaching strategy of Instruct-Practice-Evaluate (IPE), which enhances instruction One-to-One During the day Small Group with AIS Teacher Small group with classroom or AIS Teacher Small group with teacher Small group -2 classes per grade Small group or 1:1 Tutoring Small group with teacher Small group or 1:1 Tutoring 2018-19 CEP 53  groups or one to one tutoring. One-on-one Small group with teacher During the day 1:1 Tutoring Mathletics Mathletics is designedto provide students with an engaging and safe learning experience. Targeted and adaptive content with structured support, plus gaming and rewards – all aligned to Common Core, TEKS, MAFS or state-based math curricula. All 4th graders will receive differentiated instruction using Measuring Up Science and NY State Science three times a week during the science period, during the science prep period and during extended day. Science Assessment data are also used to identify students needing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and enrichment. As a result of the analysis of assessments, monthly analysis reports are created to help tailor instruction to meet the academic needs of our students using differentiated strategies. Item analyses are reviewed with various tests. Teachers use these data to set goals with students and set up small groups. We also use these analyses to integrate the school wide teaching strategy of Instruct-Practice-2018-19 CEP 54 Small group During the day Small Group, One-to-one During the day Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Evaluate (IPE), which enhances instruction Assessment data are also used to identify students needing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and enrichment. As a result of the analysis of assessments, monthly analysis reports are created to help tailor instruction to meet the academic needs of our students using differentiated strategies. Item analyses are reviewed with various tests. Teachers use these data to set goals with students and set up small groups. We also use these analyses to integrate the school wide teaching strategy of Instruct-Practice-Evaluate (IPE), which enhances instruction Assessment data are also used to identify students needing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and enrichment. As a result of the analysis of assessments, monthly analysis reports are created to help tailor instruction to meet the academic needs of our students using differentiated strategies. Item analyses are To provide students with a higher level of understanding of basic concepts, the primary focus of the social studies AIS program will be on authentic research via analysis of primary and secondary source documents as well as trade books. Services are provided via small group instruction and are delivered by the classroom teacher and AIS personnel Services are provided by the social worker and the school psychologist to students deemed at risk. Services are delivered primarily in a one to one setting during the regular school day. The at-risk counseling program includes services to assist students, teachers and parents. The goal of the program is increased levels of self-esteem, self-2018-19 CEP 55  confidence and self-motivation reviewed with various tests. Teachers use these data to set goals with students and set up small groups. We also use these analyses to integrate the school wide teaching strategy of Instruct-Practice-Evaluate (IPE), which enhances instruction 2018-19 CEP 56  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 30 Students residing in temporary housing as per our current 2018-19 ATS data. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to provide an extended day for tutoring, school uniforms, backpacks and school supplies, products for hygiene and metro cards for transportation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 57  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 100% of the teaching faculty at the Weeksville School is comprised of NYS certified teachers. Newly hired teachers become part of our highly professional staff and are provided a successful mentoring program and receive professional development in all curriculum areas throughout the year. New teachers receive ongoing assistance with organizing their classroom to create an effective environment, classroom management, developing lesson plans, engaging students in learning and assessing student learning. Our model teachers provide guidance, support and training for new teachers utilizing model classrooms as lab sites for developing teaching methodology. Demonstration lessons are provided so that new teachers can implement successful techniques and practices in their classrooms. All teachers in the Weeksville School are supported and provided with high quality professional development workshops which are differentiated to address the needs of both new and experienced staff, directing attention to individual strengths and weaknesses, grade level needs, content area focus and teacher learning styles. We have sessions this year devoted toward further implementing the ELA CCSS via teachers on grade level designing units of study. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Administration, Lead teachers, Teaching Matters & National Training Networks Consultants and District support Staff will contribute toward this high quality professional development. During the course of the school year, opportunities will be provided for inter-visitations between our school and other schools in the network. Staff members will attend conferences, workshops and training sessions at the Brooklyn Field Support PD. PD sessions occur every Monday and are led by mostly teachers. In addition to professional development sessions, we hold grade level conferences monthly, which include paraprofessionals, to discuss and implement instructional strategies that meet each grade’s specific goal. 2018-19 CEP 59  Collaborative Inquiry Team meetings are held monthly. Teachers and paraprofessionals who are providing AIS are given an opportunity to meet and share ideas with teachers whose students they service. From May through June we start our instructional focus planning for the following September in all curriculum areas. This provides our teachers time to collaboratively reflect, assess, plan and provide a focus for the upcoming school year. These meetings also provide administrators an opportunity to encourage and support staff in renewing and refining their craft regularly. Frequent cycles of observation and feedback drive our professional development programs. It will always be a goal of the Weeksville School to ensure the continued achievement for all of our students. The ongoing learning of our professional staff will help us attain our goal. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Invite staff of the preschool and kindergarten programs to participate in exchange visits. Establish and implement joint in-service professional development sessions, meetings and discussions focused on transition, curriculum and instructional practices. Establish a early childhood panel and invite parents from the local day care community so they can gain some insightful information about our pre-k and kindergarten program. Form a transition team that includes all constitutes involved so that information can be distributed and activities geared towards transitioning to elementary school from a day care setting. Pre-Kindergarten teachers will develop a list of competencies/skills that Pre-Kindergarten children will come away with when they complete the year and begin kindergarten. This list of competencies/ skills will be passed on to the kindergarten teachers for use in making curriculum decisions. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 60  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● The Instructional Team meets and confers with the Data Team. Once data is collected, we engage in a comprehensive analysis of student learning outcomes focusing on the needs of all student groups. ● Teacher Teams meet within their grades to analyze the assessments to get a better understanding of what needs to be taught. Classroom teachers, administrators, staff developers, the math coach, the AIS teacher, and classroom teachers meet on an ongoing basis to identify trends and make instructional and organizational decisions based on data. During common preps, teachers, along with the ESL and AIS teachers, meet to review test results, highlight individual student strengths, weaknesses and progress, and identify group trends. ● Assessment data are also used to identify students needing Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and enrichment. As a result of the analysis of assessments, monthly analysis reports are created to help tailor instruction to meet the academic needs of our students using differentiated strategies. Item analyses are reviewed with various tests. Teachers use these data to set goals with students and set up small groups. We also use these analyses to integrate the school wide teaching strategy of Instruct-Practice-Evaluate (IPE), which enhances instruction. Study groups and professional development are also used to inform and train teachers on how to use various tools to analyze and interpret data, i.e. School Net, Fountas & Pinnell. In-house training, workshops, and professional development are provided by school staff and outside vendors. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 175,331 87,069 0 0 1,439,946 X X N/A N/A X 2018-19 CEP 61 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 5A N/A N/A 5C  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 62  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 63  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Weeksville School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Weeksville School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 64  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2018-19 CEP 65  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Weeksville School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 66  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 67  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 68  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 69  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 70  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name The Weeksville School Borough Brooklyn School Number 243 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karen Hambright-Glover Coach Ann Brown ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Damali Weekes Teacher/Subject Area Larisa Kudman/Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Devona Sewnauth Related-Service Provider Diane Lawrence Superintendent Rahesha Amon Assistant Principal Dolores Pauline Coach n/a School Counselor Kimberly Gordon Parent Octavia Miller Parent Coordinator Norvena Anderson Logan Field Support Center Staff Member Joanne Joyner-Wells Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 71  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 215 Total number of ELLs 7 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.26% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1.Dibels provides accurate timely benchmarks and progress monitoring information to ensure students receive targeted instructional support. DIBELS are used to assess early literacy skills. In reviewing the data we see that 50% of ELL students score at benchmark. The ENL Teacher reports this to the classroom teacher to help facilitate instruction. ECLAS-2 is a research based assessment that measures each students literacy progress throughout the year. Data shows that 60% of our ELLs score at benchmark. The ENL Teacher reports this information to classroom teachers to develop plans for instruction. During the school year the ENL teacher also uses teacher created assessments to guide instructional planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 72  At the end of each skill, unit of study the ENL teacher creates assessments to assess students' mastery or lack of, and shares this information with the classroom teacher. This type of articulation is what guides instructional planning for each student. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 8. We evaluate the success of ELL Programs by looking at student progress in meeting AYP, by improvement in the NYSESLAT, and improvement in ELA, Math and Science Assessments. The program is evaluated by a 5 point increase in NYSESLAT scores across the modalities. For 60 % of ELL students in the testing grades (grades 3-5) will move to the next level on NYS ELA. 75% of ELL Students will increase one level on the NYS Math Assessments. 75% of ELL Students will increase by one level in the NYS Science Assessment. We will use the ELL Periodic Assessment to to identify progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We will analyze the needs of each student and re-arrange our flexible grouping for instruction based on the need of each student. We will also have a look at and provide necessary extra classroom resources needed to facilitate and support our students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 5. ELLs are provided with strong Core Instruction in a rigorous and evidence based curriculum, including English Language development for ELLs. ELLs are given extra attention through Intervention and activities targeted to specific students, in addition to core instruction. Intensive and Individualized small group instruction is provided for those in need. Progress monitoring data is used to make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction, and/or services; as well as to consider a referral for special education services. When progress is monitored, the expected rate of an ELL's progress takes into account language development and background. The student's progress is then compared with levels demonstrated by peers from comparable cultural, linguistic, and experiential backgrounds who have received the same or comparable intervention. We look at the pre test and use the information in planning instruction around student data. We use the Strategy Specific Reading Intervention Program for Grades 3-5. For Grades K-2 we use Sight Word Intervention. There are no native language arts at this school and no Bilingual Program (TBE) or Dual Language Program because the numbers do not permit it. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2. We use the annual NYSESLAT report to evaluate and inform our ELL program. We also use NYSITELL results. The data shows that 65% of students taking the NYSITELL last year tested proficient. The data patterns for Kindergarten reveal that 1/1 (100%) students score Proficient in Speaking and Listening and 1 (100%) scored on a Intermediate Level in Reading and Writing. In the First Grade 2/4 (50 %) scored on a Proficient Level in Listening and Speaking, 1/4 25% on an advanced level, and 1/4 25% on a beginner level. In Reading and Writing, First Grade Level, 2/4(50%) scored on a Beginner Level, 1/4 (25%) scored on an Intermediate Level, and 1/4 (25%) scored on a Advanced Level. In the Second Grade in Listening and Speaking 3/3 (100%) scored on a n Proficient Level. In Second Grade Reading and Writing 2/3 (67%) scored on an Advanced Level, and 1/3 (33%)scored on an Intermediate Level. In the Third Grade in Listening and Speaking 1/1 (100%) scored on an Proficient Level and 1/1 (100%) scored on the Intermediate Level in Reading and Writing. In the Fourth Grade 1/2 (50%) scored Proficient in Listening and Speaking and 1/2 scored an Advanced Level. In Fourth Grade Reading and Writing 1/2 (50%) scored on a Beginner Level and 1/2 (50%) on an Advanced Level . In the Fifth Grade in Listening and Speaking 2/2 (100%) scored on a Proficient Level. In the Fifth Grade in Reading and Writing 1/2 (50%) scored on an Advanced Level and 1/2 (50%) scored on a Intermediate Level. The scores of the students who took the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT exams increased in the modalities of Speaking and Listening. In reviewing the data we see that students score higher in Speaking and Listening, and lower in Reading and 2018-19 CEP 73  Writing. This information is used to plan instruction with an emphasis on Reading and Writing in the ELL program. For ELLs in grades 3-5, we also use the ELA and Math data which we evaluate and assess, for levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In order to meet the linguistic needs of our ELLs, as well as comply with parental choice and CR Part 154, PS 243 provides offers a Freestanding standalone ENL program. The ENL program serves 7 students from grades K– 5. Five students are Spanish Speakers, 2 speak Bengali. The ENL instruction is provided through Push-In and Pull-Out programs. Students are grouped heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels) as well as homogeneously (proficiency level is the same in one group) . We feasible, our program is integrated and the ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teacher and pushes into the classroom to co-teaches with the classroom teacher and provide instruction for the group. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. The ENL teacher provides services to all eligible students in two homogeneous proficiency level pull-out groups. Weekly 360 minutes of ENL are provided to all students in the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning levels while the Expanding level receives 180 minutes of ENL instruction. The Commanding Level receives 90 mins. There are no bilingual classes or Dual Language classes at this school and therefore no Native Language Arts (NLA). An ENL teacher works with ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with regular classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support while retaining content instruction time. ELLs who spend the majority of their day in all-English content instruction are brought together from various classes for English-acquisition-focused instruction, ENL teachers plan carefully with general education teachers and special education teachers to ensure curricular alignment to ELA. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. The content areas are taught in the regular classroom and supported in the ENL Program. The ENL Program serves as a major support of ELL students’ concepts of cross-cultural understanding. Providing the opportunity to the ELL student to acquire English proficiency and academic cognitive and cultural knowledge through ENL methodologies to make instruction 2018-19 CEP 74  more comprehensible to the ELL student. 100% of instruction is in English. Occasionally Spanish words are used to aid comprehension and encourage multicultural pride. The ENL teacher uses various techniques and approaches incorporating them into a balanced literacy approach using the workshop model (i.e. Whole Language Approach, Total Physical Response, Cooperative Learning, Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach, and Phonics). The ENL teacher keeps a strong articulation with the classroom teacher to ensure the academic progress of the ELL participants. The ENL teacher meets weekly with classroom teachers and Articulation Forms are filled out monthly indicating curriculum, topics and skills being covered that month. These methodologies and techniques help the ELL student develop their Basic Interpersonal Cognitive Skills (BICS) in the beginning and their Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) later on, to meet the language needs of the English Language Learners. In efforts to raise the learning standards, the ENL teacher uses a variety of literature, graphic organizers (i.e. Venn Diagram, Cause and Effect Chart, Semantic Webs and Story Maps, outlines, strategy charts, etc.) manipulatives, realia, audiocassettes, and storybooks to allow concepts to be taught through activities involving content topic and integrated thematic units. Language activities not only focus primarily on vocabulary learning, but also involve constant reinforcement to acquire language. Reading and Writing Workshop Models are used with Scaffolds to support understanding for second language learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. We do not evaluate ELLs in their native language throughout the year because we do not have Bilingual or Dual Language classes. Students are evaluated with the Spanish Lab when they first enter the system. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5. a SIFE-We differentiate instruction for SIFE students by giving them a double period of ENL daily and small group instruction. We use the Moving Into English Program for grades K-3. We use Santillana Intensive English grades K-5. Groups are differentiated. Sometimes grouped homogeneously, sometimes heterogeneously sometimes random grouping and sometimes by student choice. Visuals, graphic organizers, manipulatives, Total Physical Response and scaffolds are used to aid comprehension. 5. b NEWCOMERS- We use the Moving Into English Program, grades K-3, Strategy Specific Reading Intervention Program, ESL-Scott Foresman Program., Phonics and Friends Program, Sight Word Sentence Builder. Groups are differentiated. Sometimes grouped heterogeneously, sometimes homogeneously sometimes random grouping and sometimes by student choice. Visuals, manipulatives, graphic organizers Total Physical Response and scaffolds are used to aid comprehension. 5. c DEVELOPING ELLs receiving services 4-6 years- We use Into English, Hampton Brown, Moving Into English K-3, Verb Conjugator Computer program, Leap Into Language 3 Grades 2-5, for Math, Science, Social Studies and Language. Groups are differentiated. Sometimes heterogeneously, sometimes homogeneously sometimes random grouping and sometimes by student choice. Visuals, manipulatives, graphic organizers, bi lingual glossaries and scaffolds are used to aid comprehension. 5.d LONGTERM ELLs- We use Moving Into English K-3, Into English Program Hampton Brown, Great Leaps Reading, Verb Conjugater Program. Groups are differentiated. Sometimes heterogeneously, sometimes homogeneously, sometimes random grouping and sometimes by student choice. Visuals, manipulatives, graphic organizers, bi lingual glossaries and scaffolds are used to aid comprehension. 5. e FORMER ELLs- We give them two periods of ENL a week to support them in their class work. Former Ells get test accommodations for two years after they test proficient. Groups are differentiated. Sometimes heterogeneously, sometimes 2018-19 CEP 75  homogeneously,sometimes random grouping and sometimes by student choice. Visuals, manipulatives, graphic organizers, bi lingual glossaries and scaffolds are used to aid comprehension. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 6. The ESL Teacher works closely with the Special Education Teacher to plan curriculum to support ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. Scheduling is flexible and push-in is used to support students in their appropriate environment. The ENL teacher also uses strategies such as targeted vocabulary in each lesson, visual cues, graphic organizers, audio and technology if applicable to accelerate development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 7. We have Kaplan ELA available for intervention for the ELA. We have Kaplan Math, Leap Into Language Program 1 for grades K-2, Leap Into Language 3 grades 2-5 for Math, Science, Social Studies and language. Bilingual Libraries are available for students. All services are offered in English. We allow and encourage scheduling flexibility for ELL-SWD to learn within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 8. Our targeted intervention for ELLs in all core content areas include small group language and vocabulary study. This is offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 9. Based on the data and trends, we will look into the purchasing the Language Power Building Language Proficiency kit for our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 10. We never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 11. All students including ELLS are afforded equal access to any program offered in this school. Once parents are informed and interested in any after school programs or supplemental services, ELLs are welcomed and placed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 12. In ENL all instruction is 100% in English with native language supports. We do not have a Transitional Bilingual Program (TBE) or a Dual Language Program at this school because the numbers do not permit this. We do use technology such as computers, and smart boards to ensure ELLs are offered support. We have Bilingual Libraries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, maps, charts, manipulatives, content specific educational board games . We use web based activities such as The International Children's Digital Library and Colorin Colorado for native language support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed and delivered in ENL here at our school to students with the provision of bilingual glossaries and materials in the classroom as well as in the instructional lessons. We also assess and deliver home language support to parents. Over the phone interpretation is available for languages as well as DOE on site requested interpreters. All materials are available in the nine DOE recognized native languages for support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 76  Support Services and resources are available to all ELLs' age and grade levels. For Grades K-2 we have Sight Word Intervention and Sight Words and Comprehension After School Program. For Grades 3-5 we haveStrategy Specific Reading Intervention Program. We have the ReadyGEN Program for Grades K-5. It has scaffolding handbooks to aid ELLs comprehension. The ESL Teacher meets with classroom teachers to plan instruction and to make sure curriculum is aligned to ELL's ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does co-locate with a Charter school. Our resources are independent from theirs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not have a program to assist newly enrolled students at the beginning of the year because the numbers don't require it. We had 2 newly admitted entitled students this year. However in the future if feasible we would like the parent coordinator to host a Welcome breakfast for parents and ELL students before the beginning of the school year. We will include a school tour, and assign the student to a new class buddy. Throughout the school year for new ELLs who enroll, we would like to do an after school Chat and Chew event for the parents and the students to meet staff, the ENL teacher, the Parent coordinator and fellowship with each other. Students will meet and be assigned an in class buddy. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives available to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 19. We do not have a Dual Language Program because the numbers do not permit this. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1.We have ongoing Professional Development monthly. Included in the Professional Development are: the Assistant Principal, all Teachers, Special Education Teachers, ENL Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Psychologists, and Related Service providers. Workshops are provided covering all content areas, the first Monday of October, November, December,January, February, March, April and May. 2. The following workshops were taken by teachers on ENL Staff: Meeting CCLS for ELLs, Building Instructional Strategies for Success on the NYSESLAT for students K-8, Art and Literacy for ELLs and Teaching ELLs Across the Content Areas, Incorporation of ENL Strategies into classroom/content area instruction, NYSESLAT training and scoring, Differentiated Instruction for ELLs. The ENL Teacher meets with teachers and coaches for collaborative planning. Certificates are given for workshops attended 2018-19 CEP 77  and kept in teachers file. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2. Our school will seek out ELL Professional Development Professionals and Instructors from the UFT, to come in and facilitate sessions during the school year. We will also make available the dates and time that the UFT offers for free ENL workshops, for teachers to attend after school. Our school keeps agendas and copies of certificates the ENL teacher receives after all PDs to ensure that 50% of the total hours of professional development are met. They are kept in the teacher's file. The following workshops were taken by teachers and ENL Staff: Meeting CCLS for ELLs, Building Instructional Strategies for Success on the NYSESLAT for students K-8, Art and Literacy for ELLs and Teaching ELLs Across the Content Areas, Incorporation of ENL Strategies into the classroom/content area instruction, NYSESLAT training and scoring, Differentiated Instruction for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Overall Parent involvement is developing. Parent Orientation sessions are provided to inform ELL parents of the general requirements of the program for Bilingual Education, and or Freestanding ENL, and the various language programs available, State Standards, assessments and school expectations. In addition, parents were informed about the procedures for the placement of their children. A Parent Orientation Meeting is scheduled annually for the beginning of October. Meetings are rescheduled for all that cannot attend to ensure that every parent can attend. Parents learn about the language programs available, and how to help their children with their homework. Translators are available for Spanish Speakers. Over the phone translations are available for other languages. We will ensure that during our weekly Tuesday parent involvement scheduled time, the ENL teacher will reach out to, schedule and meet with each parent one-on-one. At that meeting the ENL teacher will discuss the goals of the program, the student's language development, language progress and language needs in the content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Twice a month we have PTA meetings that all parents including ELL parents are invited and welcomed to. One is offered in the morning and the other in the afternoon. 2018-19 CEP 78  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 79 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karen Hambright-Glover, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 80  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Weeksville School School DBN: 16K243 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) KAREN HAMBRIGHT GLOVER Principal DOLORES PAULINE Assistant Principal NORVENA ANDERSON LOGAN Parent Coordinator DAMALI WEEKES ENL/Bilingual Teacher OCTAVIA MILLER Parent LARISA KUDMAN Teacher/Subject Area CALVIN BREEDY Teacher/Subject Area Ann Brown Kia Moat Coach Coach KIMBERLY GORDON School Counselor Rahesha Amon JOANNE JOYNER-WELLS N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-28-17 9-27-17 9-27-17 9-27-2017 9-27-17 9-27-17 2018-19 CEP 81  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K243 School Name: THE WEEKSVILLE SCHOOL Superintendent: RaheshaAmon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Delores Pauline A.P. yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. One way in which we assesses our parent community language preferences is at the beginning of the school year at registration and during the school year the Pupil Accounting Secretary(PAS) gives a Student Emergency Contact card to each family registering their child . This card asks pertinent information. It asks for the parent to fill in the written and oral language preference of communication. The ENL teacher works closely with the PAS to collect and review the Student Emergency Contact cards and records the Parent's Preferred Oral and Written form of communication of students identified to be ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 82  A second way we assess language preferences is through the HLIS. This form is used for an interview between the ENL teacher and the parent who is registering a child that is new to the NYC public school system. Part 3 of this form asks parents their preferred form of communication both oral and written. The ENL teacher collects the HLIS and creates a document of the preferred Home Languages of each new admit to NYC public schools. A third way we assess language preferences is through ATS reports. Once the secretary inputs the preferred oral and written preferences of each parent, a report is able to be generated. We use this report to determine exact numbers of each preferred language as an implication of the needed amount of languages for translated documents and interpreters during the school year that we will need provide for our parent community. All of the ways we collect and assess the preferred oral and written language preferences of our parent community, assist us in making informed decisions about how to use our available resources in order to have documents translated and ensure that parents are included in education of their enrolled child. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali French English Spanish Bengali French 91.85 5.56 2.22 0.37 English Spanish Bengali Cantonese 91.85 5.56 2.22 0.37 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Newsletter 9/1, 10/1, 11/1, 12/1, 1/1, 2/1, 3/1, 4/1, 5/1, 6/1 We plan to meet a month in advance of each newsletter and the ENL 2018-19 CEP 83  Monthly Calendar of school events and activities 9/1, 10/1, 11/1, 12/1, 1/1, 2/1, 3/1, 4/1, 5/1, 6/1 Parent teacher conference announcements 9/6 After-school program information 9/15 teacher will submit a request to the DOE's T&I Unit to have it translated. We plan to meet biweekly to have the monthly calendar available to be sent and translated by the DOE T&I. We plan to have a standard letter translated with dates, available at the beginning of the school year for each and every Parent teacher conference since the upcoming school calendar dates are made available to us on the DOE website at the end of each school year. We plan to meet a month before the After school program starts, if we decide to have one or another school is hosting it. We will have a letter translated and sent home to parents giving them advanced information and notice. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher conference Day of Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Engagement Tuesdays Every Month Curriculum Night September-First week of school interpretation service(s)? Because we serve a small population, we will ensure that each and every teacher has a printed sheet with the phone number and access to a phone to make a call to the DOE Interpretation unit at the time of the conference. Teachers will have access to various in school phones that they can use to obtain over the phone translation services. We plan to ensure that every teacher has information about the DOE Over-the-phone Interpretation Services. This includes the phone number, and hours. We plan to ensure that we have designated areas/room in school with telephones that multiple staff can call the Interpretation Unit and have the key points and details of Curriculum night translated into the parents' various home languages. 2018-19 CEP 84  N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we plan to have an available list of each child's emergency contact information and phone numbers available. We will call each and every provided phone number to have communication and make an attempt to communicate the situation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At our weekly staff mandated meetings, we will give every staff member a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and have our Language Access Coordinator (LAC) do a mini presentation about the expectations and compliance policies. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663, schools will have notices informing parents about their rights to language assistance services for translation interpretation. Postings on how to obtain services will be near the main entrance of the school. We will have flyers posted at busy and populated areas such as the Main Office, the Cafeteria, the Auditorium. Translated signs will be posted to ensure that these particular parents will be able to find the school’s administrative offices when necessary. The Department’s website will provide information in the parents’ native languages about their rights to the language assistance services and how to obtain these services. The school provides translated versions in the required languages of The Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities. At our PTA meetings, we will request several interpreters to be there on site, to share information about the rights of each parent to receive information in their Home Languages. 2018-19 CEP 85  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator helps distribute the Parent Survey forms and helps to contact parents. She will make follow up calls to meet with each parent. At the meeting she will use the DOE Over-the-phone Interpretation unit to interpret and gather feedback from limited-English proficient families. 2018-19 CEP 86 
