2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K244 School Name: P.S. 244 RICHARD R. GREEN Principal: DEON EDWARDS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Richard R. Green 331800010244 PreK-5 5400 Tilden Avenue 718 –346-6240 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 18K244 718-345-3083 Fax: Deon Edwards dedwards@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Deon Edwards Noreen Oliver Marilyn Desouza/Miriam White Jennifer Jones Marilyn DeSouza N./A N/A District Information Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly A. Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 E. 95th St., Room 109, Brooklyn, NY 11236 BWilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 566-6008 Phone Number: Brooklyn FSC: 718-240-3791 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) M. Degovia Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Deon Edwards Noreen Oliver Marilyn DeSouza Evelyn Billups Miriam White Shirley Bristol Stephanie Foster Latoya Edwards *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Harriet Adams Jackie Joseph Miriam White Rhonese Matthias Jennifer Jones Phillip Watt Timeka Malcolm Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The schools vision is “Success for All, Achieved by All,” which is guided by our core values embedded in every facet of the school community—Teaching and Learning, Communication and Collaboration, Partnerships and Professionalism. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 244 is a barrier-free school located in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn and services over 600 students in PreK-Grade 5. More than twenty-percent of the student population comprises Students With Disabilities that includes physically disabled students. For more than nine years we have served students on the autism spectrum within our NEST program. The faculty comprises more than 95% of teachers with over ten years of experience P.S. 244’s utilizes the Wonders, ReadyGen and GoMath instructional programs with supplemental programs and resources that include Ready, Imagine Learning , Focus on Intervention , RAZKids, Mathletics, etc. The school’s focus for the 2017-2018 academic year was deepening conceptual understanding through critical thinking. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 244 is a barrier free school and more than twenty-percent of the student population comprises Students With Disabilities that includes physically disabled students. For more than nine years we have served students on the autism spectrum within our NEST program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school has made progress in strengthening instructional practices in writing, critical thinking and student-centered learning that resulted from collaborative teacher teams and professional learning opportunities . Teachers engaged in professional learning experiences that included Lesson Study and Lab Site classrooms to build a repertoire of instructional strategies to increase student engagement and academic rigor. Teachers work in grade teams, inquiry teams and instructional teams discussing and planning instruction using data to inform their practices. Teachers have demonstrated professional growth in collaboratively planning units of study, performance tasks and closely analyzing student work to make strategic instructional decisions. Teachers received coaching and support through the United Federation of Teachers Teacher Development Center staff developer and educational consultants and . The NEST Coach position was maintained and assisted with the development and support of new teachers and teachers with developing practices in Domain 3. In our efforts to establish a safe and supportive school culture, we continued school wide programs that included Adopt A Student, PRIDE, 244 Lions, Reading Leaders, etc. Students who exhibit The school developed the Restorative Justice Practice across additional classrooms as more staff members received intensive training. In building strong family-community ties, we have partnered with organizations such as Noel Pointer Strings, Dance Theater of Harlem and East Flatbush Village to provide student enrichment programs. Through the Empire Grant, Sports and Arts provided more than 80 students enrichment workshops in the arts and academic help daily. In our efforts to strengthen parent engagement, Parents as Reading Partners continued with additional parents visiting and reading to students. Class parents also continued meetings with administrators and worked with teachers to increase communication between class parents. The results of the New York City Writing Performance Task, NYS English Language Arts Exams and school wide benchmarks in reading, writing and math indicate that students in Grades K-5 have shown marked progress in writing. During the 2018-2019 academic year, we will continue our focus on strengthening students’ writing and critical thinking skills in order to develop: comprehension of complex texts   organization and structure in writing  ability to interpret and solve multi-step math problems with constructed responses 2018-19 CEP 10  2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K244 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 494 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 51 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 26 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 74.1% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 6.1% 0.6% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 49.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 77 77 91.0% 7.1% 24.3% 91.7% 0.6% 1.0% 4 2% 7.5 44.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s instructional programs in reading, writing and mathematics are aligned to the CCLS as students independently and with support read complex literary and informational texts. Students also respond to critical thinking questions at the higher level of Bloom’s Taxonomy and Webb's Depth of Knowledge (DOK) and teachers align questions to NYS Standardized test questions using Engage NY, Test Ready and other CCLS-aligned resources. Along with writing programs such as, Teachers College and Writing Performance Assessments, writing is infused in all subject areas as students develop understanding of narrative, opinion and informational writing and demonstrate conceptual understanding through mathematical explanations. Student writing shows improvement in organization and development of writing stamina. Priority Needs - Analysis of school-wide periodic assessments in English Language Arts and NYC Writing Performance Assessments indicate the following targeted areas for improvement:  Comprehension of complex texts  Determine meaning of unfamiliar words  Use of text evidence to substantiate main points and claims   Organization and structure of writing Interpretation of information and clear explanation While teachers have grown in their understanding of the elements of writing in various genres, further understanding of the writing process and instructional methods to strengthen students' writing is needed, particularly in Kindergarten and Grade 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By increasing rigor and engagement in daily lessons, in June 2019, 70% of students in Grades K-5 will demonstrate growth by 6 points on NYC Writing Performance Task. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher's College Writer's Workshop will be implemented in one class on Grades 2-5 and all classes in Kindergarten and Grade 1. To advance student writing, teachers will engage in professional learning activities to deepen understanding of: 1. Elements of the writing process and elements within each writing genre 2. Analysis of student work to inform next steps in writing instruction 3. Generating rubric with students for engagement in self and peer assessment of writing. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 UFT Staff Developer; Assistant Principals; Universal Literacy Coach; Educational Consultants; teacher Leaders Teachers will build consistency and cohesion in the use of mnemonics across grades. Professional development will deepen teachers' understanding of the writing process and key elements within each writing genre. Teachers will also receive professional development to strengthen understanding of key writing traits and strategies for embedding the traits in daily writing lessons. Classroom instruction will include daily academic intervention through guided reading and writing, working with small focused groups. Students will receive additional support in using mnemonics to complete writing tasks for each unit of study. Afterschool programs will also focus on writing development using CCLS-aligned writing tasks. Strategies learned through Reading Rescue program will be utilized to address the reading deficiencies that impede writing. Students will write responses to complex fictional and non-fictional texts in writing journals. Weekly, grade teams will select text and design critical thinking questions targeting specific reading skills. Students will use NYS State ELA rubric for self and peer assessments. In daily math journals, students will also write responses to critical thinking math word problems designed by teacher teams and use NYS Mathematics rubric for self and peer assessment. Students will learn and integrate new vocabulary words in daily writing. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement At-risk students; in Grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 UFT Staff Developer; Assistant Principal; Universal Literacy Coach, Reading Rescue consultant; All students in Grades 1-5 September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers; grade team leaders; paraprofessionals 2018-19 CEP 14  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018- June 2019, academic support workshops for parents will be facilitated by teachers, assistant principals and coaches to further develop parents’ understanding of reading and writing standards through simulated reading, writing and math activities. Parents will also be trained in the use of instructional programs-- RAZKids, and Imagine Learning for extended use at home. Once per month during parent engagement period on Tuesday, grade team teachers will collaborate in planning and presenting reading and writing strategies through simulated activities. Teachers will schedule goal conferences with parents allowing students to discuss their writing goals and present work products. Classes will host publishing parties to celebrate student writing with families. Student writing will also be featured in class and grade-wide publishing parties at the end of select units. Student writing will also be featured at select Parent Association meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ReadyGen, Ready by Curriculum Associates, Wonders and GoMath Instructional Program; Guided Reading Kits; Afterschool CCLS workshops; Imagine Learning; RAZKids, Focus on Intervention; Recipe for Reading; Wilson’s; Ready Instructional Guide in Reading and Mathematics; Vocabulary Workbook; CCLS Parent Workshops; Teacher's College Writer's Workshop; Writing Performance Task; student daily journals; inquiry teams; common planning of writing tasks per unit. Human Resources that will be used to implement programs will include classroom teachers, UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer, Universal Literacy coach, teachers and paraprofessionals serving afterschool program, educational consultant and administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, 60% of students K-5 will demonstrate 25% growth based on school-wide standardized benchmarks in writing. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School wide benchmarks exams in English Language Arts 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017 New York State Standardized English Language Arts and Mathematics Exams, 43 percent and 37 percent of students in Grades 3-5 scored Levels 3 and 4, which is a marked increase from the previous year. However, analysis of school wide reading unit assessments, benchmarks and teachers' records of student conferences indicate that many students need continued support in developing foundational skills in reading in order to become proficient in Common Core Learning Standards. Additionally, while guidance summary reports indicate decrease in suspensions, at-risk students particularly in Grades 2-3 demonstrated delay in social-emotional development that impeded their academic progress. To provide a more supportive environment for students, administrators, teachers, guidance team and parents will work collaboratively to:: 1. Increase school-wide activities and programs to increase social emotional learning that will yield higher achievement. 2. Develop students' foundational reading skills through intense academic intervention services 3. Design lessons that provide multiply entry points for diverse learners to ensure each student's success Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of students in Grades K-2 will increase three Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and Grades 3 -5 will increase two Fountas and Pinnell levels. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly, teachers will receive professional development in guided reading instruction and various instructional methodologies to meet the needs of struggling readers. Weekly, teachers in Grades K-2 will be supported by the Universal Literacy Coach. Professional development workshops will focus on specific instructional strategies for ensuring multiple entry points in daily lessons. Daily during our RTI period, cluster teachers will be strategically utilized to provide academic intervention services using researched-based programs that include Wilson's, Recipe for Reading and Guided Reading kits. Individual teachers and teacher teams will receive additional training to more effectively analyze various data sources (i.e. Fountas and Pinnell, unit assessments) in order to identify targeted skills for each student. Teachers will also receive additional training to maximize the use of computer software programs (i.e. Imagine Learning, RAZKids) to develop students' reading skills and monitor progress. Several initiatives will be undertaken to build confidence and guide our students to take ownership of their own learning. Weekly, students will engage in the ‘Character Building Program, Seven Habits of Happy Kids through various activities such as; drama presentations, writing, artwork, assemblies and classrooms activities. At the beginning, middle and end of the school year, students will also be involved in goal setting activities and will participate in student-led goal conferences with parents and teachers to explain goals, action plan and measure achievement. School will acknowledge students' efforts and achievements during assemblies and Parent Association Meetings. Awards will include Honor Roll, Attendance, Pride and Leader-In-Me and Student of the Month. Students will be involved in Career and College Readiness activities during assembly programs and Career Day/Week events. The Adopt-A-Student program will further address the needs of socially emotionally at risk students. After school programs facilitated by guidance team and teachers will be implemented to address social-emotional needs. Teacher will continue to be trained in order Classroom and cluster teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer, Assistant Principal, Universal Literacy Coach, lead teachers, and consultants All students in Grades K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, guidance counselors, social workers, dean, school psychologist and assistant principals; Restorative Justice trainers 2018-19 CEP 18 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals and Cluster Teachers, administrators. PPT Teachers; UFT Center Staff Developer; Principal, Assistant Principals and Professional Workshops to implement Restorative Justice practices across classrooms to improve the climate and culture for learning. By December 2018, increased number of paraprofessionals will receive training in guided reading instruction and instructional programs that include Recipe for Reading and Wilsons. Daily, they will be utilized to further support classroom instruction as well as afterschool programs for at-risk students. School will expand training of paraprofessionals and teachers in Reading Rescue. Bi weekly, administrators and Pupil Personnel Team will closely monitor logs of service providers to determine students' responses to interventions. During professional development on Wednesdays and during inquiry team meetings weekly, teachers will receive continuous professional development on RAZKis and Imagine Learning, key technology tools to be fully integrated in daily lessons. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018 to June 2019, parents will be equipped to support the development of students' reading skills. Parents receive on -going training in the use of RAZKids, Mathletics and Imagine Learning to better assist their children at home with these literacy-based online programs. Homework Help workshops on Tuesdays will support parents and students in understanding and using reading strategies as well as understanding complex reading concepts. Also, monthly parent workshops will be held to address the New Generation Standards in both English Language Arts and Mathematics. Grade teams will work to use technology to send notices and reminders about parent workshops to obtain a larger turn out. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers, speech therapists, paraprofessionals, parents, Imagine Learning, RAZKids, Wilsons, Focus on Intervention, Recipe for Reading, Reading Rescue Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  By February 2019, 40% of students in Grades K-2 will increase by two levels in Fountas and Pinnell and students in Grades 3-5 will increase by one level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Assessments and unit assessments in reading. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on Advance summary reports in 2017-2018, over 90 percent of teachers were rated Effective in Measures of Teacher Practice . Advance reports indicate increase in Effective ratings in Domain 3 from September to May. However, a small percentage of teachers still demonstrate consistent developing practices in Components 1e, 3b and 3c of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Upon review of teacher observation reports, feedback conference notes, setting professional goals with teachers and Superintendent's feedback, all evidence indicate that development of teacher practice in designing instruction to provide multiple entry points for students; student centered instruction and use of critical thinking questions to promote student discussion still remain critical areas for growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. With increased teacher collaboration in inquiry and lesson planning, by June 2019, students performing at Level 1 on New York State Standardized Exams in English Language Arts and Mathematics will decrease by 15 percent. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Increased collaboration of teachers will include weekly common planning for grade teams and pairs of teachers . Grade team leaders will structure meeting times by setting goals, agendas and next steps for daily instruction. Special Education teachers will be provided common planning time weekly to engage in instructional planning in alignment with students' IEP goals. For uniformity across grades, once per week, teachers will collaborate in teaching units of study in reading, writing and math; designing grade wide writing performance tasks; creating math and reading exams; and selection of texts, critical thinking questions and word problems for daily reading and math journals. Common planning will also include integration of computer programs (i.e. Imagine Learning and RAZKids,) in daily lessons to meet the needs of various learners. To create a more supportive environment for students, NEST-trained teachers will share additional strategies and techniques with colleagues in order to address student behaviors in general education classrooms. Daily, teachers will implement specific teaching methodologies that strengthen student-centered tasks, critical thinking questions and pair/group discussions. Weekly professional learning experiences will include activities and discussions guided by professional texts and articles including Driven by Data , Learn Like a Pirate, Teach Like a Champion and Making Thinking Visible. Teachers will deepen understanding of rigor, engagement and effective use of assessments to inform daily instructional decisions. Monthly professional learning experiences will also focus on unpacking the language of the Danielson Framework in Components 1e, 3b and 3c and modeling of strategies for creating student-centered activities and discussions. Teachers will continue to develop understanding of higher order thinking questions, cognitively rigorous tasks that are authentic and appropriately challenging for groups of students. Special Education teachers will receive further development in designing tasks and utilization of UDL strategies in instruction. Biweekly, teachers will collaborate All teachers September 2018-June 2019 NEST-trained teachers; Grade team leaders; Assistant Principals Office of Teacher Development; Instructional Leads Grade team teachers; clusters; paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Teachers; UFT Staff Developer; Educational Consultants; Administrators 2018-19 CEP 22 with ELL teacher to employ specific instructional strategies to effectively meet the needs of English Language Learners. During weekly common planning and grade team meetings on Tuesdays, teachers will engage in inquiry work using various protocols for looking at student work. Teachers will increase focus on item skills analysis of unit exams with clear next steps for instruction for groups and individual students. Teachers will learn processes for using student data to provide Tier 1, 2 and 3 services for general education, ELLS and SWDs. Monthly, administrators will conduct series of instructional rounds and lesson studies to identify specific problems of practice around Components 3b and 3c on each grade level. UFT staff developer will facilitate a series of teacher rounds for varied groups of teachers to develop student-centered lessons that include appropriately rigorous tasks. Teachers will identify problems of practice and strategies for implementation in daily instruction using instructional menu. Teachers with developing practices and new teachers will conduct intervisitations each month to observe effective practices in 1e, 3b and 3c. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grade Teams September 2018-June 2019 Teacher leaders; grade teams; educational consultant New teachers; Teachers with developing practices September 2018-June 2019 Administrators; veteran effective teachers; UFT staff developer; educational consultant How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will collaborate across grades to provide parent workshops to support parents' understanding of key reading and math skills that students have most difficulty with and how to address them at home. Grade teams will provide workshops for parents on the fourth Tuesdays every month during family engagement time. Teachers will conduct data meetings with students and parents to discuss academic goals in reading and mathematics identifying Fountas and Pinnell levels and targeted levels. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Making Thinking Visible, Driven by Data; The Power of Teacher Rounds; Teach Like a Champion and varied texts on differentiation by Carolann Tomlinson and educational websites will be utilized to conduct professional development. Human resources for implementation will include UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer; Universal Literacy Coach; NEST Coach and administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Forty percent of students in Grades 3-5 will increase performance by 20 percent on school wide standardized benchmark exams in reading and math administered in February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math and Reading Unit exams; Writing Performance Assessment; Advance dashboard; Teacher observation reports with focus on evidence captured in 1e, 3b and 3c Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The P.S. 244 school community comprises teachers with more than 20 years of teaching experience and includes more than twenty-five paraprofessionals to support our special education student population. During the 2017-2018 academic year, teacher leadership was developed through teacher-facilitated professional development workshops, teacher rounds and intervisitations . Based on Advance data, 2017-2018 Quality Review, feedback by Superintendent and teachers' self assessment shared in summative conferences, strengthening pedagogy with a focus on student-centered learning is critical to overall school improvement. Professional development is most effective when teachers engage in professional learning experiences and are provided opportunities to facilitate their own learning. As a result, teachers' professional growth for 2018-2019 will focus on: 1. Building teacher leaders by providing more opportunities for teacher-facilitated learning 2. Increasing collaborative work among teachers both horizontally and vertically to maximize the strengths of both veteran and new teachers. 3. Establishing systems for increased intervisitations for sharing of effective instructional strategies across all classrooms Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50 percent of teachers will show increased ratings in Components 3b and 3c of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional learning cycles will focus on specific instructional methodologies gleaned from professional texts and observations to increase student intellectual engagement through critical thinking. Teachers will build the menu of strategies drawn from various resources to specifically address elements of Components 3b and 3c in the Danielson Framework that promote student-centered instruction. Teachers who demonstrate consistent practice will engage in teacher rounds focused on an identified problem of practice extrapolated from Component 3c of the Danielson Framework. Teachers will unpack the rubric language of Highly Effective in 3b and 3c and align with specific methodologies and approaches drawn from various resources. Teachers will visit district school(s) to observe promising practices and share effective instructional methodologies. Teacher leaders will facilitate lesson studies focused on a common problems of practice (1e, 3b, 3c, 3d) that impacts student learning. Teachers will be supported by staff developers and coaches in designing lessons with key components and facilitate discussion to measure impact on student learning. Teachers will engage in experimental teaching utilizing an instructional strategy or methodology that addresses school wide problem of practice---increasing students' intellectual engagement by designing rigorous tasks and promoting rich student discussions. Teachers will be given opportunity to video instruction for sharing with colleagues during professional development workshops. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept. 2018- May 2019 Grade instructional lead; UFT Staff Developer; Teacher Development Coach Effective Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, UFT Center Staff Developer. Principals and Assistant Principals Teachers with dev. practices Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers; UFT Staff Developer; Administrators All Teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers; Grade team teacher leader; UFT Staff Developer; Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning September 2018 to June 2019, school will utilize the skills and expertise of parents to facilitate morning and evening workshops for parents for example in Money Management, Helping Challenging Behaviors and How to approach Child Services Matters/inquiries. Parents will also continue to support our Reading Leaders program by 2018-19 CEP 26  participating in classroom reading activities that will be increased in 2018-2019. Learning Leaders will provide training to parent volunteers who will work with students to develop foundational reading skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. UFT Center Staff Developer; Teachers, Administrators; substitute teachers, Teacher Rounds, Universal Literacy Coach; Parent Association Executive Board Members, School Leadership Team Members Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, using data from Advance, 30 percent of teachers will show increased ratings in Components 3b and 3c of the Danielson Framework . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance dashboard and teacher observation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 244 Parent Association supports the school’s instructional program through purchasing of instructional materials that support enrichment programs. Parent Association also partners in building a supportive environment for students by facilitating picture days, dessert parties for Kindergarten students, hosting Family Nights and other student activities. Parents are present in our building on a daily basis and they are always willing to assist in classrooms and with school-wide initiatives. However, while P.S. 244 serves more than 500 students, attendance at PA meetings and monthly CCLS workshops was not commensurate with the number of students served. In 2017-2018, parent participation increased through the number of 'Class Parents' who supported the schools effort in strengthening communication and overall connection between home and school. In 2017-2018 parent attendance at Parent workshop and meetings have increased by more than 50 percent in half the number of meetings and workshops held. However, while parent attendance continue to increase, it remains a growth area as we seek to provide parents more information in order to support their students and provide opportunities to increase their contributions to the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, increase parent participation by 25% in school-wide initiatives and events (i.e. Class Parents, Parents as Reading Partners, Career Day) and attendance at PA meetings and workshops. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will increase communication with our parents by continuing and developing the following practices: Parent handbook distributed in September; Monthly Parent Association and monthly Grade Team Newsletters, parent suggestion box and voice messenger. We will also expand school’s website; increase role of class parents and hold additional “Chat and Chews” with the principal at varied times to accommodate parent schedules. Parents of SWDs ( Students with disabilities) including NEST students and ELLs (English Language Learners) will be supported through quarterly workshops that address their specific needs. To encourage attendance, students' achievement and efforts will be acknowledged during monthly assemblies and parent association meetings. Classes with the highest parent attendance in Parent Association Meetings will be recognized by receiving a celebration. Monthly workshops including CCLS Classroom for Parents and students will build knowledge of reading, writing and math standards; exposure to test-taking strategies for development at home; use of online programs (i.e. (RAZKids, Mathletics and Imagine Learning) and ENL teacher meeting with parents of students in the ENL Program. Workshops will also be available through webinars to increase participation. Surveys will be conducted quarterly by the Parent Association with support of class parents to identify topic of interests and concerns. School will Increase recognition and celebrations of parents/guardians and grandparents who support student achievement through various efforts. Parent volunteers will be provided opportunities to receive training through Learning Leaders program in order to support the school's initiatives and instructional program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, guardians, family members September 2018-June 2019 Staff developer, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, teachers Parents, guardians, family members September 2018-June 2019 Staff developer, Assistant Principals, ENL Teacher, Parent Coordinator, teachers September 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator, class parents, PA board members September 2018-June 2019 PA President, Assistant Principals, teachers Parents, guardians, family members Students, Parents, guardians, family members If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Community Based Organization (i.e. Sports and Arts, East Flatbush Village) and other organizations will be utilized to provide workshops for parents and students to promote the arts, learning in the home and offer strategies for strengthen parenting skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Association Newsletter, VoiceMessenger, Monthly Teacher Newsletters will be utilized as mediums of communication. Teachers, administrators, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association Executive Board Members and School Leadership Team will be utilized to increase parent participation and attendance. Class Parents will also be tasked to increase communication between teachers and parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance rates at monthly Parent Association meetings and parent workshops September - February. will increase by 15 percent. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance logs for PA meetings and workshops, Class Parent Meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Wilson, Recipe for Reading, Imagine Learning, Focus Intervention, RTI, Guided Reading, Differentiated Tasks Focus Intervention (Math) STAMS Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are performing in the lowest third on each grade level Students who are performing in the lowest third on each grade level Lowest third of student population who have difficulty reading and responding to informational texts; The lowest third of student population who struggle in reading and responding to informational texts. Students who consistently struggle with making right choices; persistently absent, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group of 4-6 students and one on one. Small group of 4-6 students and one on one with specialists. Daily 30 minute block, After School, Push In and Pull Out and during the school day. Daily 30 minute block, After School, Push In and Pull Out and during the school day. Weekly lessons Focus Intervention; STARS; Ready; Writing Performance Small group of 4-6 students and one on one. Focus Intervention; STARS; Ready; Writing Performance Task Small group of 4-6 students and one on one. Weekly lessons Conflict resolution strategies, guidance Restorative Justice One on one Bi-Weekly and weekly sessions 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 61 students Students in temporary housing will continue to receive support from guidance team who monitors their performance and communicate with parents as needed. Based on identified needs, students receive bookbags, school supplies and other items to support their academic progress. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 32  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 33  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Newly hired teachers are vetted through an interview process with administration and exemplary teachers on similar assignments. ● Mentors are assigned and work closely with newly hired, non-tenured teachers. ● Coaches and administrators provide support and materials to develop understanding of Learning Standards and effective pedagogical practices. ● All teaching staff, including newly hired teachers, participate in high quality professional development which focus on the development of rigorous instruction for all students, including ELLs and SWDs.. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional learning opportunities are designed by administrators and UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer based on midyear and summative conferences with teachers when areas of growth are identified. ● Teachers, coaches, and administrators conduct intravisitations to observe best practices for implementation. ● All teachers and paraprofessionals receive extensive and continuous training on the Common Core Learning Standards, the Danielson Framework for Teaching and specific reading intervention programs. ● Professional learning opportunities are provided by educational consultants, UFT Teacher Center Lead Trainers, Universal Literacy coach and school administrators. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 34  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre Kindergarten curriculum is aligned to the CCLS. Prekindergarten teachers receive CCLS professional development specific to their population in addition to school wide professional development in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. Parent involvement activities are planned to include and inform prekindergarten parents of expectations and learning standards 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A committee was formed to evaluate the Methods of Student Learning (MOSL) and to come to consensus on the use of assessment measures. Extensive professional development is provided to teachers in the use of assessments to inform and differentiate instruction. Grade level teams and an instructional team that encompasses all grades are integral part of the decision making process determining instructional program and the selection of assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 35  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 313, 751.00 123, 399.00 0 0 2,433,500.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X x Column B Section Reference(s) section 5A Section 5B Section 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 36  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Richard R. Green, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Richard R. Green will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 40 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Richard R. Green, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 41  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 42  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Richard R. Green Borough select one School Number 244 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deon Edwards Coach Chantal Numa ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Gabbe Teacher/Subject Area Danielle Pontrello (Science) Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Stephenson (Grade 4) Related-Service Provider Zahava Fischbein (Speech) Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Marjorie Jackson Coach Debbie Bullen School Counselor Stacy Solomon Parent Jacqueline Joseph Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. JoAnn Benoit (ELL Support) Other (Name and Title) Dr. Soeurette Fougere C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 44  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 506 Total number of ELLs 23 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.55% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 K 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 244, Richard R. Green School, uses Fountas and Pinnell to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs (English Language Learners). This data is recorded on Google Docs to be shared with service providers, class teachers and administrators. This tool is useful in disaggregating the different phonemic skills. Acquiring knowledge on the students' learning levels allows the ENL teacher to provide targeted reading instruction based each student's need. The information from Fountas and Pinnell informs our differentiation of instruction during Integrated ENL Services as well. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 45  We plan and schedule the assessment of the students three or four times per year. The data acquired is used to determine how the child will be assessed in upcoming Fountas and Pinnell assessments. In addition, guided reading lessons are tied to data ascertained from these assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYC Performance Tasks, Ready English Language Assessment and class exams are used to assess the students' progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We use apperson data system to scan data sheets. This gives a detailed analysis of specific strengths and weaknesses of the students in relation to cohorts. The students' families are informed of the weaknesses and RAZKids and Imagine Learning Online Programs are sent home for the students to practice at home. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ELLs benefit from strong classroom instruction using carefully designed unit plans that addresses the needs of various student groups. Teachers employ UDL techniques and scaffold instruction for all students, including ELLs. Universal screening is administered to all students, and this applies to ELLs as well. In addition, to the NYSITELL and LAB-R Spanish, the ELLs receive an RTI screening, in their native language if possible. There is the sensitive, targeted intervention based on the data from; Spanish LAB-R results, screening results, and Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments for the 'At Risk' ELLs. This happens in the student's classroom with an Integrated ENL teacher giving guided support during Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions. All ELLs who score in the lowest ten percentile on State Tests are specifically targeted for RTI services. ELLS in Kindergarten through Second grades who are identified as 'At Risk' are targeted for Tiered Two Intervention. Additionally, P.S. 244 schedules a 30 minute block everyday for RTI. In these sessions ELLs needs are addressed with researched based programs; Imagine Learning, Recipe for Reading and Focus Intervention. During our RTI Block all (Academic Intervention Services) AIS teachers push into rooms to address targeted skills. All of our AIS teachers received training in order to be effective instructors in the programs used. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In looking at the outcome assessments (e.g. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT) data, it can be determined that as students spend more time in the ENL program at the school, their English proficiencies improve. Generally, they move up at least one level each year, from emerging they move to transitioning within the first year and the expanding and commanding thereafter. There is also a pattern to how most students acquire English. Generally, the initial areas of improvement are in speaking and listening as supported by Jim Cummins, who writes on the social skills being the first domains acquired but the most recent NYSESLAT data shows that overall the weaknesses were in listening and writing-listening was identified as an area of weakness. An initial focus for newcomer ELLs, is the acquisition of the oral skills in English (oracy), although of course reading and writing are taught from the start of the program. As our ELLs become proficient in the spoken aspect of English, they will spend more time writing to assess comprehension and conceptualization, this is specifically the need for the ELLs to be successful in the English Language classroom. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Collaborative analysis and interpretation of data is done. Recommendations are made collaboratively to enhance progress. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 46  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 244 has one ENL teacher. Ms. Gabbe teaches all ELLs from Kindergarten through Fifth grade. Ms. Gabbe is split between the Stand Alone ENL and Integrated ENL instructional programs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 244, this school year needed 1 teacher to cover the mandates of the ENL program and the program is delivered as follows; Levels Minutes Per Week Delivery 1. Entering and Emerging 2 Units (360 minutes) Stand-Alone & Integrated ENL 11. Transitioning and Expanding 1 Unit (180 minutes) Integrated ENL 111. Commanding .5 Unit (90 minutes) Integrated ENL in ELA/ Core Content Areas 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction for ELLs at P.S. 244 is delivered in a way to ensure that content is taught as much as possible while the students learn English. Both integrated ENL and Stand Alone ENL models are used in the school. All Stand Alone sessions involve small groups. The emphasis on content instruction is the way that we meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Stand Alone groups are heterogeneous, with several ages and proficiency levels in each group. For example, at 8:45 on Tuesday, the ENL teacher has a Stand Alone group session of 11 students, this includes; all entering and emerging students. Differentiated instruction takes place within the group; the ENL teacher breaks them up into 3 subgroups according to progress and ability. The groups change throughout the year depending on each student's growth. Integrated ENL periods are utilized daily. This is the second school year, the teacher's schedule was strategically developed with select classes having ELLs. This made the Integrated ENL (co-teaching) model very effective way of ensuring that ELLs receive a scaffold support (and their mandated minutes) without missing the important content that is being taught in the classroom. Integrated ENL sometimes facilitates one-on-one instructional support with one student and the ENL teacher as happens on the fifth grade. The ENL teacher goes into the classes during Social Studies and Science content lessons and valuable collaboration with classroom teachers support the ELLs acquisition of knowledge in these subject areas. In this collaborative experiences, the ENL teacher is able to use vocabulary and content knowledge acquired in the Social Studies and Science content in her Stand Alone instruction. The first priority when preparing ENL schedule is ensuring that the mandated number of minutes per week (90 Commanding, 180 Transitioning and Expanding and 360 Entering and Emerging) is met or exceeded for each ELL. This is the guiding principle for the creation of an ENL teacher's schedule, which happens in early September as new ELLs are tested. Often, an ENL schedule will provide slightly more mandated minutes per week per ELL. This is usually done for newcomers who could benefit from as much ENL classes as possible. However, for Expanding students on the cusp of proficiency, ENL minutes are limited to the mandated time. For Commanding students this works out to be 90 minutes per week. There is also a general understanding in P.S. 244 that it is important for ELLs to receive their mandated minutes. Therefore, the ENL teacher is never scheduled for coverage or any non-ENL tasks during the instructional day. Our program for ELLs is Freestanding. In this program , the native languages (mostly Haitian Creole and Spanish) are used to 2018-19 CEP 47  supplement English acquisition. Native-language support is always available no matter the model or language proficiency of the students. P.S. 244 has a number of educators and general staff that speak both Haitian Creole and Spanish. So, in our ENL classroom the word wall has words in the three languages. There are also bilingual dictionaries and glossaries readily available. Students negotiate meaning with each other through use of native language. Students also get to play the role of "Language Ambassador", explaining to the class (and the teacher) how they say a particular word or phrase in their native language. The language is implicitly and explicitly valued through these types of explorations, and this plays a role in helping the students to appreciate their Native Languages while acquiring the English Language. As we move into the 21st Century, P.S. 244 is aware of the role technology plays in instruction. With this in mind our students are provided with Imagine Learning. This program, allows the child to learn at his/her level in the language he or she is most comfortable with. They also allow the students to see objects spelt and used in two or more languages. As the child acquires English the program provides materials and resources that moves the child from one level to the next. The parents also are able to get weekly reports of their children's progress in their home languages. This school year the Imagine Learning Online Program was extended into the homes. So, students are now able to work on the program from all tablets and smart phones- giving them more time to improve their English Language Proficiency. Also, our students are exposed to the RAZKids Online program. This is a content bases program that gives the students reading materials in different content areas- on their reading levels. The ENL teacher sometimes provide Integrated ENL during math. A math lesson will look like this; the class teacher with do a mini-lesson and the ENL teacher will scaffold instruction for the ELL student. The ENL teacher will them introduce a few key math vocabulary words during the course of the week in both Integrated and Stand Alone instruction. During math lessons the ENL teacher does not only work with the ELLs but may have other students in her group and or she may circulate the room and assist other students but with emphasis on the ELLs. As well as, Mathletics Online Program is used to enhance the child's acquisition of math skills and concepts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students will be identified and given a welcome kit, consisting of books in the home language, an entry-level English workbook, colored photographs of the inside of a school, and welcome letters from fellow ELLs. (There are 2 SIFE students at P.S. 244) Newcomers, for their first three to four weeks are pulled by themselves for basic instruction to identify objects in the environment and basis procedures. They are also pulled with students who are on the developing level then transferred out to other groups as they progress. Developing students from different level usually work together. A lot of visual cues and discussions are used at this level Long term ELLs- their weaknesses are usually targeted predominantly in the classrooms. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers use the workshop model in instructing our students. Lessons begin with UDL, so multiple entry points are provided for all learners (including our ELLs). Students are then led into making connection to skills and concepts being taught. Throughout the lessons dialogue is encouraged through; Accountable Talk, discussions, and various talk moves. Our school uses the Ready Gen Program for English Language Arts(Grades 2-5), Wonders Program for English Language Arts(Grades K-1) and Go Math Program for mathematics. All of these programs have strong components that cater to the needs of ELLs and SWDs. There are also suggestions for differentiation. The school has also purchased materials in the major languages and our students and staff are able to access these. 2018-19 CEP 48  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELLs proficiency levels and SWDs IEP goals are examined prior to each school year and scheduling is done according to the needs of students. Instructional and curricular flexibility are embedded in Curriculum Maps, Unit Plans and daily lessons. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our ELLs are placed in the same class on each grade. During the instructional day ELLs receive instruction through the workshop model- whole class instruction, followed by small group instruction given by the classroom teacher, ENL teacher, AIS teacher, Special Education Specialist or assigned teacher assistants. ELA: Sheltered instruction through both integrated ENL and Stand Alone ENL takes place for all ELLs that are below the commanding level. Response to Intervention (RTI) is offered to all ELLs for 30 minutes daily. Ready Instructional Program and Resources from the Ready Gen Program (Grades 2-5): The Ready Instructional Guide and resources from the Ready Gen Program are used as content based to teach ELA. The Sleuth and Text Collection Books are used for Independent Reading. While Anchor Texts and Leveled Guided Reading Book are used in Shared or Guided Reading. Wonders (K-1): Components include vocabulary cards, Big Books, independent reading books and workbooks. Math: Sheltered instruction through integrated and Stand Alone (Go Math is used in the classrooms K-5 and Ready Instructional Math for 2-5). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year we have considered several programs and improvements to enhance the ENL program at P.S. 244. Firstly, we have one certified ENL teacher. She works collaboratively to maximize instructional time inside the classroom and in the ENL classroom for our ELLs. In collaboration with Dance Theatre of Harlem all of our ELLs in third, fourth and fifth grades are involved in a Dance-Literature Program. As well as, our ELLs are invited to an After School Common Core Program (Only for ELLs). We have been using the Ready Instructional Resources supported with books from the Ready Gen Program for three years and the Wonders Program for two years, but this year we deliberately took steps to make these programs more accommodating for our ELLs. We have developed Curriculum Maps and Unit Plans and in these we have purposefully identified and addressed the needs of our ELLs. Lesson plans are also crafted to deliberately address the needs of our ELL students. Therefore, resources and strategies are specifically listed to address these needs. In addition, we have had Professional Development (PDs) and Professional Learning (PLs) that address the needs of our Special Education population and our ELLs- educators are taught how to scaffold instruction , use UDL and plan appropriately for these groups. As well as, ELL parents are invited to special parent workshops- in these they learn how to support their children at home and they are made aware of what the school is doing to help their children in this setting. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded access to all programs equally. Translation invitations go out to all After School and Supplemental programs so that the parents can be made aware of these. All ELLs are a part of the RTI daily program in our building as well as, select ELLs receive push in Academic Intervention Services. ELLs are also targeted for the Dance Program and After School ELL programs. The Common Core program offered to the general population which include students scoring 1s and 2s on the New York State Tests is also offered to our ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 49  Technology-Audio and Audio Visual: There are listening stations in the ENL classroom for all ELLs. New comers are encouraged to listen to programs purchased specifically for our ELLs, including Imagine Learning and RAZ Kids. Star Fall is also used by our ELLs. In addition, new comers are encouraged to listen to books on tape in English, and these are loaned to parents. As well as, Brainpop ENL is fully audio and visual program that is used with the newcomers on the smartboard in the ENL room and classrooms. Additional audio visual materials are IReady, Funbrain, and ABCYA which is used with the students in the early grades. Books-Books used specifically for ELLs include; Language Power and Focused Intervention. In our classrooms our Ready Gen, Wonders, and Go Math programs are general materials used but we also have materials published in Spanish for our Spanish students. The American Heritage First Dictionary and The American Heritage Children's Dictionary are offered to our students (Houghton Mifflin). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in ENL classes. Students have native-language picture dictionaries at hand. Students are encouraged to discuss ideas and answer questions with each other in their first language. More experienced students are appointed translators throughout the year. The ENL teacher is also a source of support for the students native language. Our ENL teacher speaks Spanish. Conveniently, there are also many adults in P.S. 244, (School Aides, Paraprofessionals, teachers) who are fluent and able translators of Spanish and Haitain Creole. Also, in our classrooms, Ready Gen, Wonders and Go Math Programs have materials for our Spanish students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At P.S. 244's service providers, support the ELLs. Educators provide instruction that are geared to help in the acquisition of English. The students receive age-appropriate support no matter what their English level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are a Co-location site with Brooklyn Science and Academy Middle School. While we share some physical resources example; gym, cafeteria, and hallway we have our classes on separate floors so our students do not interact with the staff and students from this co-location school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There is no program for the ELLs during the Summer. During the school year, newly enrolled ELLs will receive an orientation to the building, given in the home language by a student translator and a staff member who speaks the home language. They are invited to share their stories from their previous school in their first language-using an interpreter. Commonalities between their previous school and our school are highlighted. New ELLs are given classroom buddies, ideally ones who speak their language but certainly helpful students to aid them for the first weeks. These individuals will help them to get to different areas in our building including; bathroom, cafeteria, auditorium, gym, nurse, dismissal areas etc. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 CEP 50  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Weekly grade team meetings to share strategies and plan weekly lessons. Webinars, district and DOE training and workshops. Regular meetings with cohort within the district (18). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Bi-Weekly meetings to share strategies. Webinars, district and DOE training and workshops, Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL parent meetings are held at the beginning of the school year. In all parent-teacher conferences, staff members speaking the home languages of our students, conference with class teachers with the parents. In our Monthly PA meetings and Parent Workshops, ELL parents are usually assisted by staff members to make sure information shared is understood. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are invited to monthly Parent Association meetings. They are also invited to monthly Parent Workshops. Our ELL parents are also encouraged to attend monthly grade meetings as well as, they meet and conference with class parents regularly. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None at this time. 2018-19 CEP 51  2018-19 CEP 52 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deon Edwards, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Richard R. Green School DBN: 18K244 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deon Edwards Title Principal Marjorie Jackson Assistant Principal Gail Wright Parent Coordinator Michelle Gabbe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Joseph Parent Ms. Pontrello (Science) Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Stephenson (Grade 4) Teacher/Subject Area Chantal Numa Debbie Bullen Coach Coach Stacy Solomon School Counselor Beverly Wilkins Dr. JoAnn Benoit (ELL Support) Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Dr.Soeurette Fougere Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) na na na na na na na na na na na na na 2018-19 CEP 54 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: P.S. 244, Richard R.Green Elementar Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins DBN: 18K244 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Gabbe ENL Teacher (*Primary) Michelle Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Surveys, HLIS, ATS, Emenrgency contact cards 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 55  Language Haitian Creole Spanish Percent Written Written Preferred Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Parent Letters on but not limited to : Parent Teachers' Conferences, All States Assess ments, Promotional Letters, After School Programs, Meeting with ELL Parents, Safety Concerns. 9/08/17 plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At P.S. 244, we are aware that strong communication between home and school is essential. We therefore communicate with parents in several languages. Conveniently, our school has staff members that are fluent in the languages of our students and the preferred 2018-19 CEP 56  languages of their parents, staff members that are fluent in applied languages are asked to assist in translation of documents that need to be sent to families of ELL students. We therefore disseminate the following documents in the preferred languages of our parents; Parent Letters on but not limited to Parent Teachers' Conferences, notifications of all States Assessments (English Language, Mathematics and Science), Promotional Letters (Promotion in Doubt), after school programs, ENL Teacher meeting with ELL parents, IEP meetings and safety concerns. In addition, we use google translate system. As well as, our ENL teacher speaks Spanish 2018-19 CEP 57  fluently- this is very helpful in communicating with our parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? It is imperative that our staff are aware of steps taken to make the parents of our ELLs comfortable in our school. Administration, therefore has taken steps to educate the staff in addressing the needs of our ESL families. There are key staff members who are proficient in the various languages (oral and wrtitten) that are assigned to communicate and translate for our ESL families which include but not exclusive to; para professionals, school aides, teachers and services providers. In addition, we use google translate to translate in written form. 1. Parent Teacher Conferences; September, November, March and May(All teacher) 9/08/17 2. Parent Association Meetings: Monthly.(Staff Developer, Administrators) Monthly- every second Tuesday of each month 3. Parent Workshop: Monthly (Staff Developer, Teachers, Administrators) Monthly- every second Tuesday of each month 4. Parent Engagement Evening: one per year 5 (Grade Teacher Teams). On Tuesdays as needs develop IEP Meetings: Annually (Guidance Councillor, IEP Teacher, Class teacher, Assistant Principal, Psychologist, Social Worker) 2018-19 CEP 58  As needs arises 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Conveniently, P.S. 244 has a significantly large population of staff members that are fluent in the languages of our parents' preferred languages. Select staff members are therefore used to assist in over-the phone conversations and in emergencies. These staff members are also invited to parent-teachers conferences, IEP meetings and other meetings that our Parents of ELLs attend. In addition, letters are sent in the families' preferred languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LPT (Language Proficienct Team) is charged with working to educate the school family on the needs of our ESL families. The Language Prioficiency Team will continue to educate the staff on the goals of Chancellor's regulation A663 -Translations. In our first Professional development meeting for the school year all staff members will be informed of the goal for translating for our ESL students and their families as well as, they will be informed and given resources to assist in this area. Staff members will be made aware of and exposed to the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At P. S. 244, we are aware that we are responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services and these have been provided. 2018-19 CEP 59  B. In our school at the East 54th Street entrance a sign in each of the covered languages (Spanish, Haitian Creole), indicate availability of interpretation services. C. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. (Presently, we do not have 10% of any language group besides English in our population). Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather data on the quality of services provided for our parents, administration will continue to send out surveys to get feedback. The data from these surveys will be analyzed by staff members fluent in the different languages and data from these will be used accordingly. In addition, all classes in our school have 'Class Parents'. These Class Parents (fluent in different language) will communicate with parents via telephone calls, text messages, emails and face-to-face meetings. Data collected from 'Class Parents' will be used to assess the quality of our services to parents in general and parents of ELLs specifically. In addition, staff members who act as liaison between school and home are frequently asked to communicate with these families to get feedback on services rendered. 2018-19 CEP 60 
