2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K261 School Name: P.S. 261 PHILIP LIVINGSTON Principal: JACKIE ALLEN JOSEPH 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 261 The Philip Livingston Elementary School 261D151001 Pre K-5 314 Pacific Street Brooklyn NY 718-330-9275 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 15K261 718-875-9503 Fax: School Contact Person: Jackie Allen Joseph Email Address: jallenj@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jackie Allen Joseph Jamie Gifkins Nora McCauley Cindy Lobel N/A N/A N/A District Information Anita Skop Superintendent: 131 Livingston St Brooklyn NY askop@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-4317 Phone Number: FSC: North 718-935-4300 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St Brooklyn NY bfitzgerald@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: X 718-935-3954 Phone Number: X 718-935-3362 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jackie Allen Joseph Rocco Oppedisano Nora McCauley N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A KhadijahAlgamoos Cindy Lobel Lindsey Sproul *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Tanya Friedman Stephanie Scarborough WayneIsaak Scott Jackson Maude Abeel Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to create a school community that reflects our democratic values of diversity, equity, and social justice. Through inquiry based learning, we nurture a sense of agency and intellectual engagement that extends beyond the classroom. Students develop identities that are rooted in empathy and critical thinking skills, and leave with a sense of confidence and commitment to community. We want to examine achievement gaps and disciplinary trends between students of color and their white counterparts and raise awareness of the implications among school teachers and school leaders. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public school 261 is a part of the Boerum Hill community in Brooklyn in district 15. We serve Pre K– 5 with approximately 810 students attending with the demographics - 5% Asian, 27% Black, 26% Hispanic and 38% White. Public school 261 is committed to diversity, serving a multi-ethnic and multi-socioeconomic community. Rigorous Instruction: ● Looking at student work in the data team meetings and creating next steps in learning and instructional gaps. Thus, customizing instruction. ● Creating benchmark assessments to reflect on student progress and instructional gaps ● Aligning reading, writing and math calendars using the CCLS and student work embedding time to reflect on teacher best practices in vertical team meetings ● Using student rubrics, self-assessments/teacher assessments to reflect on work and next steps ● Having related service providers push into classrooms giving them time to reflect with teachers on student progress Supportive environment: ● Each classroom using the habits of mind as a tool to create safe intellectual classrooms where by developing a culture where children fell safe, supported and challenged by their teacher and peers. ● School community developing a common language that builds on the emotional, intellectual and social community within classrooms giving students agency and independence around their school lives. (Peter Johnston, Choice Words)  *Responsive Classroom, democratic and restorative practices will be implemented in each classroom in grades Pre-K through 5 which fosters the social-emotional well-being of all students within the school community. Collaborative Teachers: ● Embedded time for teacher meetings to review data, meet around teacher needs and the arts ● Bi-weekly-Staff Development Team – provides reflection and feedback on staff development and ways to improve teacher practice. ● Vertical teams embedded in schedule – Literacy, math and social studies reflecting on curriculum maps, units of study improving on the development of skills, concepts and ideas from Pre K-5  Grades K-5 will participate in a lesson study that will support their development and refine their instructional practices in the area of math. Effective School Leadership: ● Administrative book groups around pedagogy developing a culture of learning. ● Teacher observations and feedback sessions improving on teacher practice 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Structures set up where regular student sessions occur with at risk students with the school guidance counselor, school psychologist and social worker. These sessions are weekly. ● Administrative led meetings/workshop around teacher development ● Administrative led data meetings with grade levels, data team and entire staff to improve instructional and learning gaps Strong Family-Community Ties: ● Parents as learning partners – school-wide ● Learning leaders - school wide ● PTA ● Annual -Wine Tasting and Auction – proceeds go to entire school programming ● Corporate Projects, New York Cares ● Qatar Foundation ● Arts connections – school-wide ● Studio In a School – Upper Grades ● Legal Lives – 5 th grade ● Arts Day - February  Annual Auction  Parent workshops to support engagement  Arts Committee and Stem Committee  PS 261 Cares  Character Parade  March on Borough Hall  Book Fairs  PS 261 Parent led after-school program  Outside Art Partnerships - 1. Metropolitan Opera- for grades 4 and 5 2. Arts Connection 3. Young Composers 4. Metropolitan Museum of Art 5. Qatar Foundation International Language Grant 6. American Ballet Theater 2018-19 CEP 11  ● Teacher Teams- Collaboration - Data team, grade teams, vertical teams, staff development team, ● Teacher leadership and development – Content leaders with scheduling support and administrative support 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. N/A 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School Strengths : ● Environment – 261 is a safe building with print rich classrooms. ● Social and Emotional Focus - 261 classrooms reflect a focus on social emotional needs of students. Classroom language throughout the school reflects positive, reflective empathetic environments. Children regularly practice restorative circles. ● Parent Engagement – There is a high level of engagement from parents on the classroom level to a school wide level. Parents participate in classroom celebrations, Families as Learning Partners, Livingston Leaders, Arts Committee, Wellness Council, STEM Committee,Social Action Committee, After School Committee, 5th Grade Committee along with school fund-raising providing programming for all students. ● The Arts – 261 has a rich arts program including two music teachers, two art teachers and one dance teacher. In addition, a school band-beginning and advanced, a school chorus- beginning and advanced and dance club- beginning and advanced. Instructional Practices - 261 has embedded as a practice the lesson study model to improve teaching practices in math and provides peer collaboration. PS 261 is in partnership with the math collective along with PS 321, BNS and PS 29. This partnership around math meets regularly to observe best practices and reflect on next steps. Teachers use formative and summative data to inform their small-group instruction. In addition, both vertical and horizontal teams meet frequently to ensure curriculum alignment. PS261 uses the Monday Professional development time to analyze work and create goals and next steps. This year PS 261 will use some of our Monday PD to address models of democratic practices. In addition, there will be a multi week math PD on formative and summative assessments and differentiation that supports the progression of math models in the ENGAGE curriculum. There will also be a 7 week cycle in social studies followed by a DYO and book club. Most Growth :  In January of 2017 PS 261 had a PPR in the areas of 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, 1.3 Resource Allocation, 1.4 Learning Environment. 2.2 Assessment 3.1 Goal Setting, 3.4 High Expectation, 4.1 Teacher Feedback, 4.2 Teacher Teams, 5.1 Monitoring and Revising. 2018-19 CEP 12   PS 261 received Well Developed under Quality Review Indicators 1.1 Curriculum, 1.3 Resource Allocation, 1.4 Learning Environment, We believe student engagement and student ownership over their learning is at the core of progress made at PS 261  ELA 2016 54% with a 4 point increase in 2017 o One of the highest increases from 2016 - 2017 was in African American students going from 40% - 51% proficiency along with girls in general increasing from 51% - 61%. The General Education population moved from 57% proficiency to 60% from 2016-2017 with students with disabilities moving from 9% - 17% from 2016 - 2017 o ● School Leader Practices and Decisions – Structures set in place where there is the most improvement : 1. Grade level Teams – meet weekly to look at student work in reading, writing and math. 2. 9 week data cycles determining instructional and learning gaps with the development of an action plan and systematizing protocols for looking at student work 3. Data Team – meet and plan once weekly looking at school wide assessments to determine trends, gaps and strengths. 4. Google Docs accessing shared information across the school 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K261 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 803 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 38 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 35 31 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 36.0% % Attendance Rate 32.6% % Reduced Lunch 5.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 18.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 45.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 59.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 102 100 94.2% 3.5% 17.2% 22.9% 7.8% 5.5% 2 4% 7.5 54.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. . Reflection: PS 261 has always and continues to be a very hard working and collegial environment where grade level teams meet regularly to discuss curriculum. 261 teachers have been meeting weekly and engaged in inquiry. We continue to introduced structures and protocols to support teams in looking at student work. We will continue our work with Kate Abell, our math staff developer. One particular focus will be adapting a progression of lessons on 4th and 5th grade from ENGAGE to promote agency, engagement and discourse while following the progression of mathematics laid out in the curriculum. Grade 1-5 Teachers will also take a leadership role in sharing best math practices with educators throughout the city, designing and facilitating a city-wide Tape Diagram Workshop alongside Kate Abell. Our math vertical team will work with Kate, colleagues, and members of the Math Collective to revise instruction so that it is accessible for the range of students in classrooms, while also promoting agency, discourse and engagement. Math pacing calendars will continue to be updated to incorporate and reflect this work. K-5 grade teams will also continue to update and align curriculum maps in reading and writing grades, with an emphasis on teasing out connections to themes in Social Studies Units of Study. Our work with CREATES and our Equity Team will aid this work. We will work with author and staff developer Renee Dinnerstein, and the City and Country School, to continue to develop Choice Time work in K and 1, and tease out connections to Social Studies work here as well. We will also work with author and staff developer Dorothy Barnhouse in reading instruction, with one focus being the use of small group conferences to make reading accessible to the range of learners in a classroom. This will coincide with the continuous development of our Literacy reading and writing teams to looking closely this year at aligning reading and writing instruction grades K-5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 15  By June 2019, 70% of students will meet end of year grade level benchmarks in math as measured by a combination of formative assessments (such as exit tickets and mid-module assessments), end-module assessments, and end-of-year math assessments. Teachers will utilize information from assessments to tailor instruction, adding supports, scaffolds and enrichment work to best meet the needs of all students, including students with disabilities and English language learners. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Math professional development will continue to be a priority for the school this year. We will begin by conducting an internal labsite for teachers on K-2 by January 2019. This will include intervisitations in which teachers plan, observe and debrief around sharing/growing best practices that promote student discourse, engagement and agency. We will then branch out and continue this work by holding a similar labsite for 3-5 by June 2019. A staff developer from the Math Collective will work with teachers on 4th and 5th grade, with a specific focus on how teachers can adapt ENGAGE lessons in a sustainable fashion to be more inquiry based and allow for agency, discourse and engagement while following the progression of mathematics laid out in the curriculum. Our grade-level Math Teacher Leaders and AP will provide math instructional support materials, supplementations and lessons (such as games, centers, and strings of targeted supplemental lessons) that address areas for focus identified via the end of year math assessments and formative assessments (such as exit tickets and mid-module assessments). Math Leaders will begin by researching, designing and workshopping supplemental materials and supports that address these areas for focus collaboratively as a team. Math Leaders will then share their findings - and the supports themselves - with the rest of their grade teams in a PD cycle they will design in collaboration with administration. We will hold one Math HW Parent Workshop on each grade level to aid families in supporting math at home. Math Leaders will lead these workshops, and work to familiarize parents with math Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, Math Leaders, Math Collective Staff Developer 2-3 teachers and AP in each labsite on each grade, who will turnkey to the other teachers on the grade All classroom teachers and by extension all K-5 students All teachers and their students September 2018-June 2019 Assistant principals, math leaders, and principal Students, Parents and teachers October 2018-June 2019 Assistant principal, Parent Coordinator, math teacher leaders, and principal 2018-19 CEP 17 terms, models and problems that are common parts of ENGAGE math HW. The Assistant Principal and Math Leaders will work together with grade teams to examine and discuss formative assessments such as exit tickets and mid-module assessments. The goal in this work will be to aid classroom teachers in the process of using these assessments to monitor student progress and identify areas of strength & areas for focus. We will also work to aid teachers in implementing their own timely, high-leverage supports & scaffolds to meet the demonstrated needs of students. Teachers and Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP's, Math Leaders, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Assistant Principal will coordinate a series of Math resource workshops for parents, which will be facilitated by Grade Level Math Leaders. The Parent Coordinator will add new information and resources to our parent resource pages on our schools website for help with academic support at home and math lessons. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: revised daily schedule and preps, after-school planning, teacher leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Vertical Reading and Writing Team will meet every 6-8 weeks  Math Vertical Team will meet and monitor continuous improvement bi-monthly  Grade 2 team will meet bi-monthly, looking specifically at data every 3 weeks Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Classroom/teacher observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the area of social and emotional development PS 261 has a long standing tradition and reputation as being a school which nurtures our children through a consistent school wide relief that every child who walks through our doors are ours and we, every staff member, must support the needs of that child. We have also been very fortunate to have a great support team. Our school guidance counselor, school psychologist and school social worker partners with teachers and administration and parents to use their expertise to support the needs of all students. In addition, social and emotional growth has always been a priority goal for or School Leadership Team (SLT). Because of this all school support, PS 261 has a suspension rate of below 2%. Only 2 students were suspended from our school in the 2015-2016 school year. We will continue that tradition of support in the 2018-2019 school year. Our guidance counselor, along with responsive classroom and restorative circles have all contributed to a more supportive social and emotional environment at PS 261. In 2018/2019 we will continue to introduce a mindfulness program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, 85% of our teacher will implement restorative and democratic practice structures. This will be monitored by regular classroom observations 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During Monday PD, grade team meetings, and additional time that has been created via Grade Team Extra Prep Period Meetings, teachers will share systems they utilize to meet the social-emotional needs of students, which include Responsive Classroom, RCCP, and Restorative Circle practices. New staff members will be trained in house through inter-visitations and work with mentors and AP's. All school staff:Administration, Teachers, Asst. Teachers, School Aides, Office Staff, School Safety, Kitchen and Custodial Staff Parents All students in Grades 1-5 We will utilize our internal Peer Mediator program to develop student agency in conflict resolution, and raise whole school awareness around strategies children can use to identify and resolve interpersonal conflicts. Via classroom visits by mediators and the program coordinators, we will also raise awareness about bullying and steps students should take for support in instances of bullying. November 2018-May 2019 School Leadership Team _Administration _SDC Committee _Classroom teachers October 2018-June 2019 2018-19 CEP 21 -We will develop structures to promote diversity sensitivities and cultural awareness through Fall/Spring teacher /parent workshops in order to create equitable spaces for all children. The school SIT/PPC team will attend additional workshops to address the social/emotional in order to support our school community. Agency appointed counselor, school psychologist, school social worker September 2018-June 2019 Administration, SIT/PPC teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through family workshops developed by parent led schools committees. The PTA President, the Principal and the SLT will oversee these committees during the 2018-2019 school year. @Social Action Committee @Fund-raising Committee @Wellness Council @5th Grade Committee @Arts Committee @STEAM Committee @After-School Committee We will hold one Math HW Parent Workshop on each grade level to aid families in supporting math at home. Math leaders will lead these workshops, and work to familiarize parents with math terms, models and problems that are common parts of ENGAGE math HW. The Assistant Principal and Principal will oversee the planning and execution of these workshops. These workshops will start in October 2018, and have concluded by November 2019. We will also hold Literacy Parent Workshop on each grade level to aid families in supporting reading and writing at home. Grade leaders will lead these workshops, and work to familiarize parents with expectations and ways they can best support their children at home. Administration l will oversee the planning and execution of these workshops. These workshops will start in November 2018, and have concluded by December 2018. In addition, class parents regularly meet to discuss how these liaisons can be best utilized to meet the needs of families and communicate with teachers. 2018-19 CEP 22  The SLT works to develop workshops for parents such as: The PTA President, the Principal and the SLT will oversee these committees during the 2018-2019 school year. @Homework @Math and ELA Workshop @ Race and Diversity @Wellness Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Revised schedules and additional preps, teacher leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. *Biweekly SIT/PPC meetings will monitor Responsive Classrooms structures, Teacher/Parent surveys in January and April to assess the effectiveness/feedback of the responsive classroom structures *Teacher observations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher surveys and classroom/teacher observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 261 created vertical teams in reading, math and writing. This year we continued to work together with the School Staff Development Committee. In addition, we continued to improve our work together alongside the UFT Consultation Committee and our grade level teams. Also, we used the contractual Monday PD to continue our work with grade level Data Teams. The data that was collected was used to formulate action plans and next steps. We will continue to strengthen and deepen the instructional work of each of those teams by looking in a more granular way at our schools curriculum maps, instruction, student learning and pedagogical practices for continuous improvement in student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all PS261 vertical teams (Math, reading, writing, word study) will meet monthly to review data. This date will be used to develop an instructional focus for differentiated PD for teachers and small group work within the grades. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue all committee, grade level and vertical team meetings All instructional staff *9/20178-6/2019 All instructional staff *9/2018-6/2019 Continue monthly vertical team meetings to ensure whole school alignment in all content areas · Continue Monday PD cycles · Continue Staff Development Committee (SDC) meetings · Continue UFT Consultation Committee Meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, 2 Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, UFT Rep, SDC, Principal, 2 Assistant Principals, Team Leaders, UFT Rep, SDC, How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Assistant Principal, Sara Apfel and Parent Coordinator, Heather Weston will host a series of parent workshops explaining the ICT model and how to support children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will give time to complete assessments and analyze them with embedded periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored throughout the year in collaboration with UFT and the school's SDC ensuring that all teacher level teams support teacher pedagogy and student progress. In addition, administration will review Monday PD notes as well as classroom observation to monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monday PD notes and 6th prep period Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Principal has been a leader around equity work and initiatives. This has included leading a District-Wide Equity Congress, participating in the creation of the NYS Intergration Plan and its corresponding launch within District 15, and leading a Learning Partners Program Triad alongside the International Studies and the Brooklyn Arts & Media Schools. The Principal has brought similar equity work to PS 261 via work with CREATES and grade-level teacher teams around developing and implementing culturally relevant pedagogy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of grade-level teacher teams will have implemented at least one interdisciplinary Social Studies unit that has been developed and revised to demonstrate best practice in culturally relevant pedagogy. 2018-19 CEP 27 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All grade 1 Data team members Sept/2018 Principal and 2 Assistant Principals February2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The 1st grade team will: *read and discuss the Lesson Study Step by Step book *meet on Monday afternoons to incorporate the Lesson Study protocol into their 9 week cycles. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through our open houses, parent conferences and community workshops we invite families to engage with our teachers and administration through out the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Embedded PD and time to accomplish this goal. Additional scheduling. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  *Progress will be monitored through classroom/teacher observations, student work, and Monday PD notes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom/Teacher Observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. *All school staff will work together with our Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board, SLT, and all school wide committees to ensure that families feel welcome and respected. Through parent workshops, all parents will be informed of student progress and school data. Our Parent Coordinator will send out weekly automated-calls, and manage our school website PS261.org, as well as send out backpacked memos with all relevant information. Principal and Assistant Principals will hold Town Hall meetings 3Xs per year and attend all PTA general meetings, as well as participate on the SLT. The school will provide translation services for our Arabic, Spanish and Japanese speaking families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve our parent participation rate by 10% on DOE Parent Surveys. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? *Translation services provided for all Arabic, Spanish, and Japanese families. All parents *PC will communicate via weekly emails, automated calls, translated communication in backpacks as a follow up, town halls, *PC and in house translation services *9/2018-6/2019 *9/2018-6/2019 Principal, 2 Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, SLT Principal, 2 Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Metropolitan Museum of Art, American Ballet Theater, Recess program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be measured by actual count of DOE Parent Surveys provided by Office of Family Engagement and parent feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 31  The Parent Survey responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below grade level on Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessment, and school created informal writing assessment and/or NYS assessment Below grade level on school created assessment and/or NYS assessment Below grade level on informal assessments Below grade level on informal assessments Mandated IEP services, teacher recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Repeated reading, stepped up text strategies Small group, one on one instruction, Saturday Academy In school and after school Interactive problem solving Small group instruction, one on one instruction, Saturday Academy In school and after school Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group, one on one During school day During school day During school day Repeated reading Repeated reading Intervention strategies determined by provider 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) we currently have 25 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Parent Coordinator, Heather Weston makes sure the children have clothes, gifts during the holiday season, books and back packs along with school logo t-shirts. If families need food and other essentials there are food and coat drives that also benefit our families in need first and then to the community in our area. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). As of 6/2018, 25 students are identified as STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34 In September 2018, we will contact the 25 families to ask if they need assistance with items such as school supplies, food, clothing, etc... We will ensure that the counselor will meet with each student and contact their families. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. TBD 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Team of staff developers that have helped promote CCSS and Monday PD Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 36  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A $3,694,983 pgs. 14,17,19,21,23 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 37  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 38   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 261, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 261 will support parents and families of Title I students by: providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other me Parental Involvement and School Quality       The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation 2018-19 CEP 40  of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:     actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;       conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.261, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 46  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale Research has shown that students must possess a strong oral language foundation to achieve literacy success. Low-language native English speakers and ELL speakers arrive at many grade levels with insufficient language knowledge to support learning. When structures within a text are beyond students’ receptive capacity, students struggle. The Let's Talk About It! Oral Language Reading Program, a sequential, structured approach for oral language development helps students to understand that their thoughts can be spoken, written down, and read. The program supports students in developing the language and learning strategies necessary for both reading comprehension and writing composition. The program includes assessment tools to identify oral language proficiency and explicit, systematic lesson plans to develop oral language through small group instruction. Schedule, Duration, and Students to be Served This Oral Language Reading Program (Title III LEP Program) will be available to all eligible ENL K-5 students. Newcomers and students with mild to moderate gaps in oral language development will be the targeted subgroups. The program will run consecutively for 35 weeks for an hour and 20 minutes, three times a week. The program will begin on October 3rd and run until March 29th. The classes will be held on Wednesday, Thursday,and Friday directly after school from 2:40 - 4:00. The subgroups to be served will be 2nd through 5th grade beginner and intermediate ENL students. Books lists and materials are outlined below. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students to be Served The after-school program will service 2 groups over the coarse of the year; one group of 7 - 4th and 5th grade Arabic speaking students students, one group of 6 - 2nd and 3rd grade students. Materials for Small Group Instruction In the oral language-reading sessions, teachers will encourage students to talk about photos, and then record students’ ideas to read back, reinforcing the concept that what we think, we can say and what we say can be recorded and read. 1 ENL Certified Teacher will service students. Instruction will happen in English. Materials Mondo Let's Talk About It Oral Language Program Materials, Kits B-D. (K to be services with Kit A, which we have.) Recipe for Reading card stack for phonics and spelling reinforcement. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 47  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Rationale <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> With a need to accelerate language development, academic literacy, and disciplinary knowledge of all students, particularly English learners, we will collaborate with QTEL (Quality Teaching of English Language Learners) to foster student discourse, engagement, and agency. With a focus on promoting long-term academic and professional success, QTEL’s pragmatic and classroom-friendly approach to learning is informed by rigorous sociolinguistic research and therefore aligns with the mission of our school. Drawing from sociolinguistic research on effective practices with English learners including studies in second-language acquisition, oral and written literacies development, systemic functional linguistics, and theories of accelerated English language acquisition, the QTEL program works to build the capacity of educators to develop students’ abilities to read, discuss, and write academic texts in rigorous content area courses. Because of this emphasis on a pedagogy based on sociocultural theories of learning, the QTEL approach is classroom-friendly and pragmatic and works with students to experience a compelling way to work collaboratively. The PD will focus on developing educator capacity in supporting ELLs and other language minority students to develop their full potential through carefully constructed, implemented, and monitored interactions that scaffold the learning and acquisition of content and language knowledge simultaneously. A QTEL provider will conduct the teacher trainings. Agendas and required reading will be sent out 2 weeks prior to the meeting and attendance sheets will be kept with ENL records in room 416. PD will happen during Monday PD time - from 3:00 pm - 4pm - 2 times per year. Topics such as the following may be covered: From Silence to a Whisper to Active Participation: Using Literature Circles with ELL Students Scaffolding Instruction for English Learners Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Is this component at cost or at no cost to the program? If at cost, please, indicate exactly how many hours the teachers will need in order to be paid and when (schedule). Rationale Parental engagement activities will be a series of 3 workshops to provide parents with tools needed in order to support their children in language acquisition. Certified ENL teacher Marissa Torres will lead the parent activities. Teacher will do a series of parent workshops throughout the year to integrate the content and language goals for students with the work of the PTA. Schedule and Duration March 13th 2019 from 2:40-3:40- Promoting Literacy at Home for ELLS (teacher to be paid per session) 2018-19 CEP 48  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities April 17 th 2019 from 2:40-3:40- Technology Skills for ELLs (teacher to be paid per session) May 29th 2019 from 2:40-3:40- Literacy through Theatrical Play for ELLs (teacher to be paid per session) Topics to be Covered Promoting Literacy at Home for ELLS The first of the series will be a workshop to encourage literacy and oral language at home. ENL teachers will provide tips and strategies on reading and writing with their children in English and their native language. Interpretation machines will be used. Technology Skills for ELLs The second workshop will consist of ENL websites that will allow students to practice literacy skills at home. Literacy through Theatrical Play for ENL Students The third workshop would be a workshop rooted in Theatre of the Oppressed techniques, outlined in the book Games for Actors and Non-Actors. Teachers and parents will engage in verbal and non-verbal group activities as a means to build home-school connections and foster relationships. This will encourage critical literacies through theatrical play. Parents will be notified of these activities by letter in their preferred language. Record of attendance and invitations will be maintained by the ENL teacher in room 416. Translation equipment will be available. Light refreshments will be provided for families and a raffle for prizes will be held. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8,915.55  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $400.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, $2,472 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 teacher @ $60.65 for 4 hours each week for 35 week After School Program ($8,491) 1 ENL Teacher @ $60.65 per hour for 3-one hour Parental Involvement Workshops sessions. (181.95) One QTEL provider @ $200 per hour for 2-one hour sessions. Mondo Bookshop Grade 3 Core Reading Program 1 Getting Started Guide (online); 2 Teacher’s Edition Volumes (6 themes each); 2 Themed Text 2018-19 CEP 49 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Collections – IWB/Digital Fort (Available in interactive whiteboard and digital formats only.); 12 Single Title Selections – IWB/Digital Format (Available in interactive whiteboard and digital formats only.); 2 Teacher’s Lesson Plan Binders - Guided Reading Lesson Plans: 48 lessons plans (3 sessions per book), 18 lessons plans (3 sessions per Info/Lit text pair), 12 lessons plans (3 sessions per themed text set); 48 Oral Language Lesson Plans; 48 Guided Reading Books (6-packs) 24 informational books, 24 literature books; InfoPairs Book (6-pack); LitPairs Book (6-pack); 2 Themed Text Collection Student Books (6-packs); Let's Talk About It! Oral Language: 1 Photo Chart (22”x 28” easel format) and text cards Classroom supplies for Title III student program: notebooks, chart paper, sticky notes, etc ($250) Software included in the Mondo Core Reading Program Outlined above. N/A Food/Refreshments/Raffles for 3 Parental Involvement Trainings: $175 for each session. $12,312.55 instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) N/A Travel Other TOTAL N/A $525.00 $12,312.55 2018-19 CEP 50  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Phillip Livingston Borough Brooklyn School Number 261 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jackie Allen Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marissa Torres Teacher/Subject Area Tara McHugh Teacher/Subject Area Rita Perez Related-Service Provider Loretta Dowlat Superintendent Anita Skop Assistant Principal Sara Apfel, Alex Messer Coach N/A School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Heather Weston Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 799 2018-19 CEP 51 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.26%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We believe that the educational strengths and needs of ELLs can be identified most effectively through multiple forms of assessment. In addition to the standardized outcome assessments such as the ELA, 4th grade Science exam, and the NYSESLAT, teachers use a variety of formative assessments throughout the year to guide instructional planning. These include, but are not limited to running records (Fountas and Pinnell), Words Their Way and Fundations phonics spelling inventories, teacher created writing assessments and oral presentations and/or debate or student portfolios. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Formal and informal observation of both social interaction and academic engagement serve as a means to assess developing literacy skills for ELLs. Restorative and responsive practices are the foundation in to which all content is rooted. We believe language is the medium in which the negotiation of this content is conducted. To that end, in the lower grades, Science, 2018-19 CEP 52  Choice Time and Center structures, and Independent Writing Cycles play a pivotal role in supporting thoughtful instruction. In the upper grades, Science, Circles, and project-based learning rooted in inquiry, independence and portfolio building make up the framework. On going PD is also provided to guide teachers in integrating language and content, particularly in math and science. In literacy, this is built into the meta-cognitive procedural based knowledge of navigating and composing/decomposing a variety of texts. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers are encouraged to use practical approaches to authentically assess the language development of ELLs in ways that are holistic and student centered. Baseline and periodic assessments are both language explicit (ELL Periodic Assessment) and integrated with content (beginning and end of year math assessments, end of module Engage assessments, end of unit science portfolios, end of unit portfolio writing pieces, end of semester self assessments). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? F&P guided reading materials, lesson studies in math in collaboration with Brooklyn North and the Math Collective, weekly and bi-monthly grade-based inquiry meetings where teachers focus on struggling students collectively, after-school ENL programs, content based small-group enrichment programs centered around math, art, science, theater/story telling, chorus. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1: Core Instruction ELLs receive targeted instructional support in conjunction with language support from classroom teachers and ENL provider. Core instruction integrates language across the curriculum and relies on cooperative learning environments to foster control over academic language for ELLs. The writing, reading, science, SS, and math curriculum are inquiry based and look toward solving real world problems for a genuine audiences. The use of rubrics and self/peer/teacher assessment checklists allow for on-going authentic assessment and feedback. The core curriculum therefore fosters both declarative and procedural knowledge and builds confidence, agency, and sense of belonging to the school community amongst ELLs. Tier 2: The Double Dose Guided reading allows for targeted instruction in small groups and informative assessments for each student. Small group, content based enrichment programs Tier 3: Intense Intervention After-school ELL programs provided by ENL teachers 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the ELA and Math state exams, NYSESLAT, F&P Running Records are used to inform the ELL program. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Monthly vertical team meetings, weekly grade team meetings, monthly ENL/classroom teacher meetings. Shared plans and student observation and conferencing documents via Google Drive. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 53  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 261 implements an integrated and stand-alone ENL program depending on the needs of the ELLs. After the ELL provider evaluates the data, they decide which groups to teach. Entering ELLs receive one unit of ENL Stand-alone and one unit of Intergrated ENL/ELA. Emerging receive .5 unit of Stand-alone ENL along with 1 unit of Intergrated ENL/ELA and .5 unit of either depending on the needs of the student. Transitioning ELLs will receive .5 unit of Intergrated ENL/ELA with .5 of either intergrated or stand-alone depending on the needs of the students. Expanding will receive 1 unit of Intergrated ENL/ELA. Commanding will receive .5 of either Intergrated ENL/ELA or another content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model by allowing the ELL provider to work closely with the content area teachers ensuring that the mandated hours are met. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to ensure that content of comprehensible for ENL students to have access to lessons that meet the CCLS, both content and language objectives are clearly defined, displayed, and reviewed with all students. This helps Ss identify what they need to know and be able to do by the end of the lesson and/or unit. When generating language objectives, teachers consider academic vocabulary, language skills and functions, language structures or grammar, and learning strategies. Classroom teachers and the ENL providers work together to ensure that the concepts taught are appropriate for age and educational background level for ENL students. Supplementary Materials are used to a high degree to make lessons clear and meaningful, content is adapted to students proficiency levels, and meaningful activities that integrate concepts with opportunities to practice all modalities of language. Classroom teachers who work with ENL students as a part of the integrated program are encouraged to use the SIOP model for differentiation and lesson planning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since we do not offer a bilingual program at this time, ELLs are not evaluated in their native language. The only exception is when the Spanish speaking students take the Spanish Lab. The Spanish Lab determines language dominance. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. SIFE students receive ENL mandated hours. They are chosen for an after school ENL program where they focus on studying strategies. The plan for SIFEs is to include them in the appropriate grade level classroom and provide them with the extra 2018-19 CEP 54  intervention. SIFEs will work with the ENL during the school day. The ENL teachers will work closely with the classroom teachers to ensure that the student is making progress. Instruction will be differentiated by teachers who work with the SIFEs and communication will maintained on a regular basis between teachers and parents, as well, so that student is brought up to grade level. 6b. Newcomers are paired with English-speaking students/teachers from a similar background, if possible. If not, then they are paired with students who enjoy helping their peers. This is a mutually beneficial relationship where both students learn from each other. Newcomers can learn nuances of American culture from their peers in an academic environment. Their peers are exposed to a different point of view. Newcomers literate in their native language can use the strategies they learn in their native language and apply it to English. Newcomers also will attend ENL after-school program and the Saturday Scholars. All newcomers receive the appropriate amount of ENL instruction as mandated. 6c. ELLs are separated by levels, in order to focus on similar language structures. Allowing ELLs with similar proficiency levels to work together allows the ENL provider to focus on learning strategies. ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years receive the mandated of ENL instruction. Classroom teachers differentiate instruction for the students and are made aware of their language needs. The ENL teacher also differentiates instruction and works closely together with the classroom teacher to move these ELLs along. Use of the NYSESLAT scores to focus on instruction and provide the student with the appropriate language scaffolds to support their language acquisition and development. Parents are also encouraged to come in and meet with the teachers to also assist in helping the 4-6 year ELL students make progress. 6d. Long-term ELLs receive the same interventions and strategies mentioned above are also used. They are given the properly mandated ENL instruction, in which the ENL teacher focuses on the specific language needs. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers to build on these language needs both in the classroom and in the ENL pull-out program. We also have an inquiry group that focuses on writing throughout the school year for long term ELLs that have been here for 4-6 years. 6e. Former ELLs are closely monitored by the ENL teacher and current classroom teacher. They are given the mandated number of ENL minutes of integrated ENL services. The ENL teacher works with the classroom teacher to help the former ELLs in their class with their specific needs. Support is given to the classroom teacher to help meet the needs of the former ELLs. Former ELLs are allotted extended time for city exam for two additional years have scoring proficient on the NYSESLAT. ENL separate testing environment. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used for ELL-SWDS are Fundations and Reading Reform for reading interventions, Let's Talk About It! to address gaps in Oral Language development, and Fountas and Pinnell for guided reading to support more English proficient ENL students. Materials used that provide access to academic content areas iPads, apps, large photos and images. Native language materials used are dictionaries, bilingual books, bilingual websites. Some examples of native language texts used are the Oxford Picture Dictionary for Children, which comes in multiple languages. There are also bilingual books that are used by both the ENL providers and the children to develop literacy skills. In addition, language is scaffolded for read alouds and class presentations and lessons. Bridging is used to connect the ELL students' content area knowledge with new vocabulary and promote language development. Charts and other visual also help ELLs in learning a second language. ENL teacher use alphabet, sight words, and picture cue cards to develop the English language. Teachers also try to group or pair ELL students with English proficient students to serve as a language model for the ELL student. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a number of different instructional strategies and grade-level materials to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Among other things, visual charts,graphic organizers, leveled books, and word walls differentiate for each student. Meetings are held to discuss the students' progress with the classroom teacher. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 261 modifies the curriculum by using a mix of push-in and pull out. By having small group settings the students can focus on the material at hand. The instructor can also provide ELL-SEDs with individualized attention to better achieve their IEP goals. 2018-19 CEP 55  We try to mainstream whenever possible. Generally this is done one or two periods out of the day. All ELLs and self contained students are joined with another appropriate grade level class during all specials. ELL and classroom teachers discuss curricular and instructional strategies to support the needs of the ELL-SWD. The school uses a variety of instructional tools such as the use of technology like the smartboard and computers as well as computer programs, such as Imagine Learning. PS 261 ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize the time the ELL-SWD spends with non-disabled peers, both in his or her classroom and in the ESL group. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention programs English Language Arts: *Collaboration with content area and ENL teacher to develop a community of learning that is aligned with the Common Core. *Be familiar with the academic performance of each ELL by analyzing data. *Allow opportunities for students to participate in conversation that develops their academic language. *Provide high-interest, level independent reading books for ELLs in their native language and in English. *Create a print rich environment, using ESL dictionaries in an ELA classroom. *Analyze data of ELLs to become informed about the academic performance of each ELL. *Imagine Learning for ELL students, Reading Reform for ELL students, and after-school ENL program. Targeted Intervention programs in Social Studies Content Area: *Collaboration with content area and ENL teacher to develop a community of learning that is aligned with the Common Core. *Be familiar with the academic performance of each ELL by analyzing data. *Allow opportunities for students to participate in conversation that develops their academic language. *Create a print rich environment, using ESL dictionaries in a Social Studies classroom. *Provide content vocabulary support. *Ensure all language modalities are incorporated during lessons using a variety of methods including group collaboration and daily journal writing. Targeted Interventions for LAP in Mathematics Content Area" *Collaboration with content area and ENL teacher to develop a community of learning that is aligned with the Common Core. *Be familiar with the academic performance of each ELL by analyzing data. *Allow opportunities for students to participate in conversation that develops their academic language in math, like using English in word problems and collaborative group work. *Allow students to communicate their problem solving skills in Math. *Analyze data of ELLs to become informed about the academic performance of each ELL *Students work closely with the classroom teacher and ENL teacher. *Analyze students mathematical strengths and weaknesses in order to drive and differentiate instruction. Targeted Intervention program in Science Content Area *Collaboration with content area and ENL teachers to develop a community of learning that is aligned with the Common Core. *Be familiar with the academic performance of each ELL by analyzing data. *Allow opportunities for students to participate in conversation that develops their academic language in scientific words. *Create a print rich environment, using ESL dictionaries in a Science classroom. *Analyze data of ELLs to become informed about the academic performance of each ELL. *Provide content vocabulary support. Plan for ELLs Requiring Intervention Support: If intervention is required, PS 261 has a providers willing to provide additional support, including three speech therapists. SIFE students and their level of English and academic success will vary as will our instructional approaches and classroom modifications. SETSS and AIS services are provided and reflective of each students IEP goals. 2018-19 CEP 56  ELLs are entitled to testing accommodations for local and state assessments. ELLs also have monthly conferences with the ELL providers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our greatest hope this year is to continue to integrate language and content in all classrooms. Our ELL community will be central to developing and implementing our new gardening program at 261, entitled Think Like a Farmer. City Growers, the staff developers, will work with the ENL teacher and ENL student body to plan for, take care of, maintain, celebrate, and advocate for our school garden. This is a long-term 5 year project. Incoming ELLs in Kindergarten will get to see the project through to it's finish. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given equal access to all school programs by offering a variety of school programs open to all students. Math and ELA help specifically designed for ELLs is also offered. ELLs work with the ENL provider during extended day for extra English support. During the school day, there are a variety of standard curricular classes including ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and Physical Education. In addition, Art, Technology, Music, Chorus, and Arabic are offered as electives. After school extracurricular activities include chess, Spanish, sports, baking, and arts and crafts. All students including ELLs, are afforded equal access to all programs available. The school makes every effort to translate any notices in the parents preferred language to ensure that thee students will be given the same chances. There are also ENL after-school program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At PS 261, we use native language books, both Spanish and Arabic, bilingual dictionaries, and glossaries as instructional materials to support ELLs. ELLs also use technology in the form of iPads, word processing programs and the Internet. The ENL teacher also provides language games that students use to develop their language skills land interact with other students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is dependent on the student's knowledge of their native language. We incorporate as many native language resources as possible including, but not limited to native language books, bilingual dictionaries, translation services and technology. At PS 261 the ENL teacher will bring in books that demonstrate and show various languages to promote positive self-awareness and pride in the student's home language. In addition, language is scaffolded for then in read alouds and class presentations and lessons. Charts and other visual aids also help promote the students' second language development. Using Technological resources like iPads, various education websites online, and Google Translate, is also important for native language support. At this time, PS 261 does not have TBE or Dual Language program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and support always respond to ages and grade level . Students are placed according to age ensuring that they are with peers who are around the same age. PS 261 will order new materials for the students that is selected by the school's ENL teacher and classroom teachers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 57  Newly enrolled ELLs meet the ELL provider, support staff, and parent coordinator prior to the start of the new year. They can tour the school building and the ENL provider provides the new ELLs a brief orientation where their parents can address any questions or concerns. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Arabic Art as a content objective. It is through a program called The Global Language Project funded by the Quatar Foundation. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teacher will attend PD on an ongoing basis during the school year. Every Monday afternoon there is PD at PS 261. They also have access attend PD outside of our school throughout school year. Every year, PS 261 incorporates one full-day session of professional development workshop specifically designed for ELL instruction, which addresses the pedagogical and curricular requirements that are aligned to the Common Core. The ENL inquiry team also shares at the staff meetings. We plan to take full advantage of offered by Brooklyn North that allows for a larger layer of teachers to teacher with an eye towards language instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS 261 meets the professional development requirements as per CT Part 154.2 15% of the total hours for all teachers and 50% of the total hours for ENL teacher receives ELL-specific professional development. ENL teacher has access to PD through the OELLP website. Additionally, our school has weekly PD after school on Mondays and will be participating in PD through City Growers, QTEL, and The Math Collective. The ENL teacher keeps records of the agendas of the professional development that the teacher attend. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PS 261 will provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The ENL teacher reaches out to the parents and classroom teachers of the students and sets up a meeting that is convenient for all parties involved. 2018-19 CEP 58  Sometimes this takes places during the Tuesday parent-engagement time, but can be scheduled at another time, as well. Letters are sent home and translation is provided if need and an interpreters is present at these meetings if needed, as well. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents along with students are invited to all school related events such as publishing parties, book fairs, writing celebrations, and school trips. Parents are informed about all PTA meetings and encouraged to join. The ENL department also hosts multicultural festival and potlucks during the holidays, especially for the families of ELLs to integrate different cultures and allow parents to view what their students are working on at school. Most parents attend all parent-teacher conferences and any additional meetings including, but not limited to IEP meetings. Parents also attend show for their children, like drama, music, dance. The parent coordinator also hosts a services of workshops for parents. The school also keeps parents informed about the workshops for parents where transportation is included. The ENL department informs parents about speakers of interest at OELL. Since there is a high Arabic and Spanish speaking population there are two main translators at our school. Aziza Altaheri, a licensed speech therapist, contacts the Arabic speaking families about parental involvement. Marissa Torres and Osdillia Caban translates for the Spanish speaking families. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jackie Allen Joseph, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 261 School DBN: 15K261 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jackie Allen Title Principal Sara Apfel Assistant Principal Heather Weston Parent Coordinator Marissa Torres ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kim Hayden Parent Tara McHugh Teacher/Subject Area Rita Perez Alex Messer Agnes Martinez Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marlene Pendergrast School Counselor Anita Skop Sylvia Gimenez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Loretta Dowlat Other Speech Therapist N/A N/A Other N/A Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 06/27/18 N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K261 School Name: Philip Livingston School Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Osdilia Caban Marissa Torres Pupil Personnel ENL Teacher NO NO YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess PS 261's written and oral interpretation needs are collected from the following sources: the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), which is completed by every parent of new admits to the New York City public school. This survey provides information on the languages spoken at home. Blue emergency cards, parental feedback and information in students' cumulative records also help us determine translation needs. ELL providers and other faculty analyze the gather data to determine which school documents and announcements need to be translated. They also use this data to determine the languages that need translating. There are 40 ELLs at PS 261. Only a handful of parents speak English; those that do are contacted in English. All other parents PS 261 uses Arabic and Spanish translators. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Based on the data and analysis that is gathered from the parent of the students, and taking into consideration the school's written translation and oral interpretation needs, PS 261's needs are mainly in Spanish and Arabic. The ELL provider reported these finding to classroom teachers at the beginning of the school year. The parent coordinator, Heather Weston,and the school administrators were made aware of PS 261's linguistic needs to ensure the appropriate means of communication are met. The majority of the parents requested written communication and oral communication to be done in English. There are some, however, that requested oral translation in a different language. There is also a family that requested English written communication, but Arabic oral interpretation. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 63  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written language translation is provided in-house by school staff and parent volunteers. There are members of staff who speak the same languages as the parents so when needed, both school staff and parent volunteers choose to translate for the school. Bilingual school staff translate progress reports, at risk educational plans, field trip notices, school announcements, after school program information, parent-teacher conference announcements and many other documents that are sent home throughout the school year. The ELL providers also use the Department of Education website to download many common forms and applications that were translated by the New York City's Office of English Language Learners in the covered languages. Evelyn Aleman translates for the Spanish parents, while Heba Omar translates for the parents from the Middle East. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PS 261 holds four parent conferences throughout the school year. The first, in September, introduces parents to their child's new grade and provides curriculum information. The next three , held in November, March and June are focused on student progress and grades. The ENL teacher holds a parent orientation for any newly enrolled ELL parent/guardian as well as separate meetings for individual ELL parent/guardian throughout the year. Teachers communicate with parents throughout the year in order to address questions/concerns as well as any possible issues in or outside of the classroom. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP 64  Bilingual members of the LPT will come together and make calls to families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, the ENL teachers will present at a whole staff meeting and provide relevant information. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school plans to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services in a few ways. First, The school will provide any parents who has a primary language that is covered language and requires language assistance a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibities. This will ensure that the parent is aware of the policies of the school and their rights. Second, the school will place a sign of all the prominent covered languages advertising the availability of interpretation services. Next, the school's safety plan will have a secton ensuring parents that language barriers should not prevent them from contacting the school's adminstrative services. If PS 261 has 10% or more of children whose parents speak neither English or a covered language, then the school will obtain the translation and Interpretation Unit, which will provide translation in the non-covered language. Finally, if the home language spoken is a covered language, the school will direct the parents to the Department of Education website to inform the parents of how to access translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of written translation and oral interpretation services a parent survey will be sent out to the parents and feedback will be taken into account for future services provided. The ENL teacher also meets individually with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. The ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parents/guardians and students. 2018-19 CEP 65 
