2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K262 School Name: P.S. 262 EL HAJJ MALIK EL SHABAZZ ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: JOELETHA FERGUSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information EL HAJJ MALIKEL SHABAZZSCHOOL 16K262 School Number (DBN): 331600010262 PK-5 500 Macon Street Brooklyn, NY 11233 718-453-0780 Phone Number: 718-453-0679 Fax: JoelethaFerguson jfergus@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JoelethaFerguson KwokWong Nicole Juspais Desiree Barter NashawnaHarley N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 16 RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: ramon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-2834 Phone Number: 718-935-4467 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 LivingstonStreet, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JoelethaFerguson KwokWong Nicole Juspais NashawnaHarley Desiree Barter Carol Gibson Danielle Hamson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ Staff Member/ Staff 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MarlenaGiraldo William Giraldo RubiJones Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 262's mission is to strive to increase collaboration between the school, home, and community in order to ensure each student is prepared to be lifelong learners in the 21st Century. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 262 is located in historic Bedford Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. Our school currently educates 200 students in grades PK - 5. At PS 262, we have created a safe environment and we have an effective system for addressing the social, emotional, and health needs of students from counseling, referrals to family/housing agencies, uniforms, school supplies, dental, optical, and personal hygiene items. Our inviting and well-kept school building showcases our pride in students' accomplishments with prominently displayed student work. We continually reflect on best teaching practices and carefully analyze student learning and progress to continue to meet the diverse needs of the students and their families. The school develops relationships with families, community partners, and providers in order to support students' academic progress. For families, we provide them with grade level newsletters, monthly workshops, notices which are backpacked, school telephone messenger service, school's website and social media page, monthly Principal's Chats, and Electronic messaging. We:  Promote and sponsor special events and programs, Family Night activities, monthly assemblies school-wide (performed by students/classes and outside agencies). Learning Leaders (parents) volunteer in classes weekly. School Nutrition classes through partnerships with the Food Bank and Grow NYC.    Parent volunteers provide arts and gardening instruction to students.  Annual Women's Conference (every March) promoting healthy choices, medical screening, health issues, and information for women in the community.  Monthly Fatherhood Initiatives, Bring your child to school Day (September) - fathers bring their children to school and remain for monthly topics and sharing of information for men (child support information, job/school referrals/information, issues related to men/fathers).  Partnership with Brownstoners - Community organization that has adopted our school. Volunteers read to students in classes monthly and provide information to parents during Parent/Teacher conferences.  Teachers use Class DOJO to inform parents about student's progress, upcoming assignments, missed assignments, and behavioral issues.  Attendance is monitored closely and outreach is made daily.  Basketball Team consisting of students (co-ed) of grades 3-5 encourages students to learn the sport and to collaborate as a team. 2018-19 CEP 10   Parent Workshop series offer families to learn about the curriculum, standards, assessments, educational goals, student progress and how to help children succeed in school. Translators are available in alternative languages for families in need of translation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. According to Spring 2017 NYS ELA data - on average students scored 20% a difference of -9% than in 2016 where the average was 29%. Math = 2017 11% compared to 14% in 2016. Teachers will study the results, paying particular attention to sub-groups and their impact such as, students in the lowest third, English Language Learners (ELL's and Former ELL's), Students with Disabilities (SWD), and/or overage students/students who were previously held over. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Effective School Leadership: A school-wide focus on teaching and learning, specifically Guided Reading and Math. This is articulated and achieved through using key higher-order questioning in lesson planning and executed in lessons, using checklists and rubrics to assess growth during lessons, using rubrics to measure growth across assessments in reading, writing, and math. This is all used to evaluate and drive instructional practices. We began the year with professional learning workshops on Guided Reading - as it is one of the most effective tools not only to improve students' fundamental reading skills but to also help students develop higher level comprehension skills. According to our 2016 - 2017 NYS Assessment scores: 2017 NYS ELA scores are at 20% (2016 were 29%) - a difference of -9%. 2017 NYS Math scores are at 11% (2016 were 14%) - a difference of -3%. We have a centrally funded Universal Literacy Coach (Literacy for All) who provides coaching to teachers of grades K, 1, and 2. Additionally, we have: 1. In alignment with the Citywide Instructional Shifts, Danielson Framework, and the Common Core, the school community began to prepare to meet the higher standards and implement practices to move students towards meeting higher standards. 2. Established an environment that engages and challenges students in rigorous learning experiences. 3. Integrated our knowledge of Bloom's Taxonomy with Webb's Depth of Knowledge to analyze our instructional and assessment practices to move beyond basic comprehension and increase rigor. 4. We are defining what academic rigor looks like across classrooms, so: 2018-19 CEP 11   We increased the text complexity practice and CLOSE reading strategies across classrooms by engaging in numerous professional development sessions via on-site and off-site presenters, group studies, webinars, and inter-visitations to deepen our instructional practice of analyzing text.  Teachers scaffold their lessons and use a rigorous approach to questioning.  Teachers consistently receive professional development in rigorous lessons to align their instructional practice to the common core - teaching what is relevant.  Teachers plan for what students should understand and be able to do by the end of learning the unit.  Students are now given more opportunities to apply their knowledge and make inferences based on what they are learning. Students are now given more opportunities to apply their knowledge and make inferences based on what they are learning. Students defend their claims and evidence.    At the conclusion cycle, students are able to demonstrate their learning.  Teachers engage in Teacher Team Meetings and collaborative inquiry to look at student work assessments, analyze data and re-adjust instructional practices through differentiation. 5. Professional Development sessions are focused to develop core classroom practices, data analysis, and student learning outcomes. 6. Students are part of the goal-setting process. They set goals for themselves based on deficits identified on assessments and during conferencing with the teacher. 7. As a result of students and parents being a part of the process, students are able to articulate their understanding and misunderstandings; parents are better prepared to support their children at home or direct them to the appropriate resource. 8. We are moving toward a more student-centered, rigorous environment. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K262 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 179 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 32 31 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 34 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 90.5% % Reduced Lunch 2.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 11.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.09 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 41 89.5% 4.5% 16.2% 83.2% 0.6% 0.6% 2 13% 5.8 56.5% 14% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our school's Spring 2018 NYS ELA scores are 56% as compared to 2017, which were at 20% (a difference of +36%). The NYS Math scores are at 57% as compared to 2017, which were at 11% (a difference of +46%).  School leaders ensure an articulated vision and mission is understood and shared across the school community; School leaders share with school staff community, SLT, and parents student performance trends from state assessments and performance by subgroups; specifically SWD's who are not making any progress;  Ensure instructional outcomes, strategies, and learning activities are aligned to the Common Core  Standards; Instruction is data driven, based on NYS exams, MOSL and classroom assessments;   Teachers engage in collaborative reflection and inquiry across grade levels;  Structures to support distributive leadership and teacher voice in affecting student learning across the school;  Collegial walkthroughs within the school building by Teacher Team members;  Principal Chats to inform parents, encourage partnerships with community at large;  Analyze results of school survey to refine and include new strategies inclusive of all stakeholders; Implement school improvement plan based on student achievement results of 2017-2018, School Quality Snapshot, NYC Survey, and as compared to the 2017-2018 Advance Scores. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Administrators will observe student engagement in rigorous academic work in 98 % of classrooms when conducting observations (ADVANCE) using Indicators 3B (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques) and 3C (Engaging Students in Learning) resulting in 5 % student improvement in scale scores on NYS ELA and Math Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Administrators will gauge rigor based on Bloom's Taxonomy and will be looking for higher-order thinking skills when conducting observations (ADVANCE). Observational evidence and feedback will be documented and discussed with teachers and on ADVANCE. Administrators will design/offer professional development focused on differentiated instruction that adapts the curriculum to individual learning needs, and quality questioning strategies as well as teaching to individual student learning levels to better meet the needs of all students. Administrators and Teacher Leads will create a presentation of Best Practices that encourage higher order thinking skills. Our PTA and SLT share our quest for excellence and we view our parents as an integral part of our school progress. A calendar is published and backpacked each month. Twice a month, the teachers and staff prepare materials to share with parents regarding school/grade/class expectations, goal setting, and progress towards reaching the learning targets and goals. We have Family Math and Literacy Nights facilitated by on-site instructional lead teachers. Parents are encouraged to visit classes to learn more about how we teach reading and math. Teachers also communicate with parents via Grade level newsletters, calendars, Class Dojo, and Progress Reports are sent home quarterly. In addition, parents are encouraged to visit our school’s website for up-to-date information regarding upcoming events. Information is also shared via PTA meetings, Principal’s Chat’s, and Parent workshops. Teachers Administrators September 2018 – June 2019 Administrators, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, SLT, and parents September 2018– May 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leads, SETSS teacher. September 2018 – May 2019 Administrators, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, SLT, and parents Brooklyn Network coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Literacy for All Coach, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, and SETSS teacher. At PS 262, you will find mutual respect, a myriad of academic programs and a group of dedicated stakeholders. Teachers and Parents are involved in the decision-making process: Parents via the School Leadership Team and teachers through the Principal’s Core Instructional Team membership. The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents and students centered on student learning and success; the school encourages and empowers families to Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, SLT, and parents September 2018– May 2019 Brooklyn Network coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Literacy for All Coach, Guidance Counselor, Social 2018-19 CEP 15 understand and use data to advocate appropriate support services for their children. Parents are informed of online resources such as EngageNY.org. Teachers are an integral part of the PTA and routinely provide parent informational resources during the PTA meetings. Worker, and SETSS teacher. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host monthly Workshop sessions to allow parents and families to understand the rigorous instruction and Bloom's Taxonomy - Higher Order Thinking Questioning students will be engaged in. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Observational Walkthroughs take place daily. Professional Development is embedded in the staff’s professional work day [Mondays]; information is shared during Lunch and Learns/Chat and Chews; Inter-visitations as well as collegial walk-throughs providing warm and cool feedback to participants. Parent Engagement activities are scheduled [weekly]; Administrators and Mentors will visit classes and provide timely, action-oriented feedback to the teachers; substitute teachers and ATR’s provide coverage; using per diem funds. Advertised per session activities will be allocated to implement the goals for supplemental compensation as the collective bargaining agreements. Outside community agencies are brought in for supportive assistance [mental health and counseling]. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will identify teachers in need of instructional support and provide Professional Development as necessary. Initial observations (IPC's): September/October 2018 Mid-Year Review: January/February 2019 Summative Review: April/May 2019 Mid-Year Review: February 2019 -Mid Year Conversations based on ADVANCE observations and student data (Fountas and Pinnell reading levels; class assessments; mid-year benchmark assessments; Promotion in Doubt classification) will indicate progress toward goal(s). 2018-19 CEP 16  Mid-Year Review (January/February 2019) - Administrators have scheduled and conferred with teachers after an in-depth review of ADVANCE observational feedback, student data on interim and class assessments and Promotion in Doubt status to determine instructional next steps. Professional support is scheduled with teachers to engage students in best instructional practices. Professional Development sessions have been scheduled to support teachers. After an overall review of the new NYS Accountability Report, an in-depth school study to examine the factors that lead to an increase in student achievement with students with disabilities and at-risk students will be conducted. By the end of June 2019, the progress will be measured by a reduction in the number of students scoring Levels 1 and 2 on NYS Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher Team will meet weekly. Goals will be established and re-established as instructional factors arise. Benchmark Goals - September/October 2018 Mid-Year Goals - January/February 2019 End of Year Goals - April/May 2019 Teachers will collaboratively create a CCLS aligned assessment and related rubric ELA and Math. Part 5B (February 2019) Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress - Grade level Interim Assessments aligned to CCLS in ELA and Math will be used to measure progress. Additionally, teacher observational reports (ADVANCE) will be used to measure progress. We will also use the ESSA Accountability Report to assess progress. Part 5C - February 2019 - Progress - Professional Development Sessions will continue to provide teachers with tools to ensure student academic success. Teachers meet weekly during Teacher Team Meetings to conceptualize instructional strategies based on students' needs. Professional development sessions will be planned based on a mid-year review of teachers' ADVANCE observational feedback. Part 5C - February 2019 - Progress - Teachers were given a Needs Assessment Survey to determine professional development needs/next steps. Adjustments will be made to the Professional Development Yearly calendar based on the pedagogical needs of the teacher. Professional Development sessions are conducted in-house, through the Brooklyn North Professional Learning Series, and via the NYC Showcase Schools visits. Saturday and After school Programs are offered to students in Grades 3 - 5. The After school and Saturday programs provide intensive support instruction in ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 17  Intentional and focused in-class visits and lesson plan reviews to assess teachers direct instruction to students with disabilities; students who are on the cusp of meeting (or not meeting standards); and students in the lowest third. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Comprehensive Assessment: According to the Quality Review 2017 - 2018, our school received a Proficient Rating in all 10 Scoring Criteria. We believe that when children and families know that their teachers and school community care about them and are trying their best to relate to the realities of their lives, they become far more inclined to trust and actively engage in learning. We have instituted procedures where students feel safe and supported. We have in place: 1. Clear policies and Code of Conduct/Behaviors are established in September (and is on-going); 2. Frequent and effective communication with families through weekly Parent Engagement activities; monthly newsletters, PTA and Parent Workshops sessions/meetings, and Class DOJO for immediate attention; 3. Staff members are aware of early signs of harassment and bullying and act swiftly to intervene when 4. warranted; Instruction is more focused and relevant, student engagement in learning is improved, which in turn has a positive effect on behavior. Students must be engaged in challenging studies/learning opportunities in order to see value in learning and to experience success, leading to less likely chances of disengagement or negative behaviors. 5. Understanding that most often poverty is influential students academic lives, under circumstances we offer students materials and conditions to positively influence students learning and academics (breakfast/lunch at varied times depending on needs; school supplies; access to eye care, medical referrals, after school, AIS services. 6. Small learning environments, student clubs, monthly trips to educational sites and attractions in and around NYC, and extra-curricular activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 19  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% reduction in the number of OORS related incidents and 311 calls/reports to the Community Superintendent/District Office as compared to June 2018's data. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Literacy for All Coach, AIS Team  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Introduction of students taking PRIDE: P- Prepared R- Reflective I - Innovative D - Data-drive E - Engaged Shifting from a "Fixed" to a "Growth" Mindset; Praising student effort; Shifting to perform as a Professional Learning Community. Our daily curriculum includes activities to enhance student learning. We have SMART boards, laptops, desktops, and iPad technologies in every classroom. Teachers use academic enrichment not only to enhance student learning, but to also help students who need extra support in reading and math. Our teachers work collaboratively to develop highly engaging lessons designed to encourage all students to learn and achieve at high levels. Student leaders are cultivated and participate in the district's Scholar Ambassadors program, and student-centered learning. Critical and creative problem solving skills are also emphasized in all areas of the curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 21 Online technologies including Imagine Learning provide intensive support for students who experience difficulty in reading and math. Additionally, Administration and Instructional Core meet weekly to discuss ways to help classroom teachers make fundamental changes in their pedagogy. Administrators, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents September 2018- June 2019 Twice a month, the teachers and staff prepare materials to share with parents regarding school/grade/class expectations, goal setting, and progress towards reaching the learning targets and goals. We have Family Math Nights facilitated by on-site instructional lead teachers. Teachers also communicate with parents via Class Dojo and Progress Reports are sent home quarterly. The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents and students centered on student learning and success; the school encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate appropriate support services for their children. Students participate in monthly activities (Pro-social skills/activities) including but not limited to: 1. Basketball Team Games; 2. Girls Mentoring Program; 3. After School Program; 4. CookShop 5. Assembly Programs 6. Instructional Trips in and around NYC Student achievement is celebrated across the curriculum Monthly Community Read Aloud's with our neighborhood community partners, the Brownstoners. Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Literacy for All Coach, AIS Team Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Literacy for All Coach, AIS Team September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Core, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Core, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, AIS Team, and Literacy for All Coach. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host monthly parent engagement meetings to allow parents and families time to understand supportive programs available to them. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development is embedded in the staff’s professional work day [Mondays]; information is shared during Lunch and Learns/Chat and Chews; Parent Engagement activities are scheduled [monthly]; Administrators, Instructional Core, Mentors will visit classes and provide timely, action-oriented feedback to the teachers; 2018-19 CEP 22  substitute teachers and ATR’s provide coverage; costs for supplemental compensation as the collective bargaining agreements. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers identify students who are at risk academically and adjust instructional strategies to better meet these students' needs. Students are referred to the Pupil Personnel and SIT Team who meet monthly to discuss student progress. Teams decide which social and emotional support(s) that are needed and provide support accordingly. Families are referred to agencies for additional support [counseling, mental health, etc.] Initial programming: September/October 2018 Mid-Year Review: February 2019 Summative Review: June 2019 Mid-Point Review (February 2019) Teachers, Pupil Personnel and SIT Teams have identified at-risk students. Teachers have identified which students have Promotion in Doubt status. Parent Meetings are continuous and students/families have been referred to Agencies (where applicable); additional supports are provided via academic programs After School and Saturdays programming. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Part 5B (February 2019) - Mid-Year Benchmark Assessments aligned to CCLS in ELA and Math are used to assess progress. By February 2019, 100% will be working collaboratively on a teaching teams. Part 5 C - Progress towards meeting goals - Teachers meet weekly in Teacher Teams to collaborate on student data and goals to lead to student achievement. Data is reviewed, teaching is designed based on student need and achievement. Part 5C (February 2019) - Administrators meet with teachers during Teacher Team meetings to ensure (monitor) that specific instructional goals are addressed based on student data. Teachers revisit lesson plans, student groupings, questioning and instructional tasks to ensure student achievement and best practices are maximized. Observations are continuous, written and verbal feedback are given to teachers after each observational visit. Administrators visit classes on a daily basis to monitor expectations. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5C (February 2019) - Administrators meet with teachers to discuss new ESSA Accountability Report. Students identified as delinquent in attendance will be of intense focus. Students who are identified as "move-able" and "slip-able" have been identified. Intense supportive instruction will be delivered through AIS Literacy and Math blocks during the school day and again in the After School and Saturday programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Using the data from the 2017-2018 NYS assessments and teacher created assessments, Teacher Teams will have cross curricular conversations across grades and subjects which are needed to plan effectively for student achievement as well as vertical and horizontal alignment. Teams comprised of Administrators, teachers, Guidance Counselors, SBST, and Service Providers meet regularly to discuss data trends. This is crucial to determining students’ strengths and weaknesses. This is based on the CCLS and performance based assessments students have to complete. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the teachers will improve in their instructional practice through collaborative inquiry work in literacy and math resulting in the student improvement in scale scores on NYS ELA and Math assessments. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  For the 2018-2019 school year, teams will plan and organize for team work. From October 2018– May 2019, teams will attend professional development sessions within and outside of the school building – including Showcase Schools. Teachers will be guided to set norms for group productivity and implement team goals. Common planning time is scheduled into the instructional day(s). As part of the weekly professional development sessions, teachers report findings; professional books of the team’s choosing are provided; Administrators and instructional leads model professional discourse, engage teacher teams as they examine student work and data, define instructional strategies and set goals for implementation. Student progress will be monitored with common assessments. Teachers will revise and repeat the inquiry cycle. Teachers will work on developing personalized learning plans and setting and monitoring both short and long-term goals for individual students. Teachers will continue to set professional learning goals to improve teacher practice. Using the collaborative inquiry cycle process, teachers will continue to develop skills in organizing and analyzing data effectively to facilitate teaching and learning using formative and summative assessments. Teachers employ differentiated instruction that adapts the curriculum to individual learning needs, and quality questioning strategies as well as teaching to individual student learning levels to better meet the needs of all students. Twice a month, the teachers and staff prepare materials to share with parents regarding school/grade/class expectations, goal setting, and progress towards reaching the learning targets and goals. We have Family Math and Literacy Nights facilitated by on-site instructional lead teachers. Teachers also communicate with parents via Class Dojo and Progress Reports are sent home quarterly. In addition, parents are encouraged to visit our school’s website for up-to-date information regarding upcoming events. September 2018– May 2019 Administrators, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Department Team Leads September 2018– May 2019 September 2018– May 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Department Team Leads 2018-19 CEP 26 Information is also shared via PTA meetings, Principal’s Chat’s, and Parent workshops. Workshops range from Homework assistance, Literacy, Math, CCLS, and grade level information for student achievement. September 2018– May 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Department Team Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host weekly parent engagement sessions/opportunities to allow parents time to meet with teachers on how to promote and support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development is embedded in the staff’s professional work day [Mondays]; information is shared during Lunch and Learns/Chat and Chews; Parent Engagement activities are scheduled [monthly]; Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentors will visit classes and provide timely, action-oriented feedback to the teachers; substitute teachers and ATR’s provide coverage; costs for supplemental compensation as the collective bargaining agreements. Outside community agencies are brought in for supportive assistance [mental health and counseling]. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher Teams will meet weekly. Goals will be established and re-established as instructional factors arise. Benchmark Goals – September/October 2018 Mid-year Goals – January/February 2019 End of year goals – June 2019 2018-19 CEP 27  We will engage in additional Parent Informational Chats and to include topics of Parents Choices as they relate to Parent Engagement Tuesdays to increase the level of parent engagement. Professional Development sessions include topics from Teachers' Needs Assessments as well. Progress Monitoring (February 2019) - Principal has planned and met with Parents during the "Cookies and Coffee" with the Principal meetings to engage the parents/community with the school updates and information on student progress, events, instructional goals and targets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, Teacher Teams will meet weekly to review instructional benchmarks and materials; using concept maps in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. Teams will also review the ESSA Accountability Report for data to drive instruction. Part 5 C - Progress toward meeting goals - Professional Development sessions on Mondays will provide opportunities for Administrators to communicate expectations based on data and instructional walk-throughs necessary to ensure student progress. Part 5B - Progress Monitoring (February -March 2019) - Based on the results of the NYC Parent Surveys and the new ESSA Accountability Report, we will determine progress and instructional/community/social next steps. PTA and SLT Members will take school developed surveys to determine parent body needs (in cooperation with the Parent Coordinator). Part 5C - (February 2019) - Parent Workshops will be held and facilitated by the Administration (with assistance of the Parent Coordinator) to explain the new ESSA Accountability Report and what the school is committed to doing to ensure success. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We as a school community are moving toward a distributive leadership model. Professional development, workshops, and meetings have more ongoing staff input to reflect their needs and the needs of their students. We are continuing to strengthen our transparency of school goals and policies for families and staff.  The Administrators have provided time for collaboration in the daily schedule for Teacher Teams;  Conduct one-to-one meetings;  Allow time for mentoring; Schedule inter-visitations;   Provide opportunities for collegial walkthroughs;  Teachers were given an Needs Survey;  Communication via email highlighting best practices daily;  Teachers are made aware of instructional decisions – supported by the SLT; Staff is engaged in the four (4) critical questions of a Professional Learning Community: What do we want students to learn?; How would we know if they have learned it?; What will we do if they don’t learn it?; What do we do if they already know it? Additionally, professional development sessions (Mondays) have been modeled by Administration and teacher presentations throughout the 2018 - 2019 school year. The goal is for the teachers to take the lead in facilitating PD for ICT, Special Education, student engagement, and differentiation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 school leaders will implement targeted professional development sessions using evidence from focused observational walk-throughs and feedback (ADVANCE) to measure how students are achieving; to assist teachers in goal setting for improvement; and to ensure that instructional practices learned during the PD sessions are being implemented as prescribed. 2018-19 CEP 29  2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). For the 2018-2019 school year, a year-long professional development schedule with targeted and differentiated support for implementation of ESSA, deliverable through a variety of venues – using job-embedded time during the day as the main forum for delivery. Clear expectations and the components expected for Effective teaching practices, as identified in the Teacher Effectiveness (ADVANCE). The vision, goals, targets, and achievements will also be communicated. Vertical grade level teams will meet monthly to align curriculum, apply Depths of Knowledge (DOK) instructional practices, identify research based teaching strategies, identify appropriate resources, and to support teacher implementation. The topics selected will meet the identified needs of the school. After the needs have been determined which practices are effective, the information should be shared with teachers to ensure the strategies are incorporated in their teaching practices. Meanwhile on-going professional development of ESSA and monitoring of teacher implementation will continue. Administrators will provide explicit feedback to individual teachers to improve teaching and learning. Differentiated supports to modify teacher practices to improve student achievement Vertical grade level teams, Teachers, Administration N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 31  within the existing structures of walkthroughs observations will be established. Administrators will monitor the use and implementation of higher-order thinking questions within the classroom that create greater engagement/student inquiry and classroom activities. Purposefully designed lessons support this level of rigor; results will be discussed school-wide. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A September 2018- June 2019 N/A N/A School Administration and Teacher Leaders N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host weekly parent engagement opportunities for parents to meet with teachers to help support children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development is embedded in the staff’s professional work day [Mondays]; information is shared during Lunch and Learns/Chat and Chews; Parent Engagement activities are scheduled [monthly]; Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentors will visit classes and provide timely, action-oriented feedback to the teachers; substitute teachers and ATR’s provide coverage; costs for supplemental compensation as the collective bargaining agreements Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Clear expectations and the components expected for Effective teaching practices, as identified in the Teacher Effectiveness (ADVANCE). The vision, goals, targets, and achievements will also be communicated and revisited as necessary. Vertical grade level teams will meet monthly to map CCLS, align curriculum, apply Depths of Knowledge 2018-19 CEP 32  (DoK) instructional practices, identify research based teaching strategies, identify appropriate resources, and to support teacher implementation. The topics selected will meet the identified needs of the school. After the needs have been determined which practices are effective, the information should be shared with teachers to ensure the strategies are incorporated in their teaching practices. Meanwhile on-going professional development and monitoring of teacher implementation will continue. Administrators will provide explicit feedback to individual teachers to improve teaching and learning. Differentiated supports to modify teacher practices to improve student achievement within the existing structures of walk throughs observations will be established. Administrators will monitor the use and implementation of higher-order thinking questions within the classroom that create greater engagement/student inquiry and classroom activities. Purposefully designed lessons support this level of rigor; results will be discussed school-wide. 5B: By February 2019 - Progress Monitoring: During instructional walk throughs. Administrators communicate expectations and revisit as necessary to ensure implementation. 2017-2018 Quality Review data and ESSA Accountability Report are used as well. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, all teachers will be a part of a Teacher Teams will review benchmark assessments and data based on Response to Intervention (RtI) assessments in ELA and Math. Part 5C - Progress School Administrators have partnered with Algebra for All who provide one-on-one support to teachers as they plan and implement instructional lessons and assessments. Data is gathered and analyzed to inform instruction. Progress Monitoring (February 2019) - RtI Team members have revisited list of students to determine students' needs/instructional next steps/progress toward academic (grade level) achievement. 2017-2018 Quality Review, Principal Performance Observational Feedback, and ESSA Accountability Report are used to assess (measure) progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We encourage parent involvement, as a result: Students and families will feel more connected to school as evidenced by improved attendance, achievement, and involvement in extracurricular activities and decreased disciplinary referrals; Parents participate in at least 3 parent-teacher conferences throughout the year; Parent Meetings to discuss student data on Progress Reports, teachers' in-class assessments/observations, and report cards; Parents are invited to at least community events monthly, such as Parent Workshops, Family Fun Fridays, co-ed Basketball Games Grandparents' Day; Publishing Parties; monthly assemblies, ESL; Cook Shop for Families; and Parent Engagement Tuesdays. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the teachers will have participated in focused activities to increase positive relationships with student families and members of the community. The focused activities - including but not limited to - Family Workshops facilitated by ACS, Parent Tea, Cookies and Conversation with the Principal, Breakfast with Champions Student Recognition Breakfast, Community Meetings each Monday with students, Student Government, Brooklyn Community Services, Bedford Stuyvesant Family Health Center, Restorative Justice Presentations, Holiday Programs (Feed the Families, Math and Literacy Nights, STEM Science Fair, Brown Bag Lunch, CCLS, NYS ELA and Math Assessments, Character Literacy Day, Volunteer opportunities, Grandparents Group, Breast Cancer Awareness, Women's Conference, Fatherhood Academy, Mental Health Project of the Urban Justice Center, NYU Dental Center, and Parent to Parent NYS. 2018-19 CEP 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Parents will be provided with the Parent Compact and printed information for on homework policies and on monitoring and supporting student work at home. Communication between the school and parents occur via the automated telephone call service, electronic messaging boards, calendars, newsletters, school website, Class Dojo, progress reports, and during parent/teacher meetings/conferences. Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents September 2018 - May 2019 Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Department Team Leads School will clearly communicate school policies to all families in their home language. The school will strengthen families’ knowledge and skills to support and extend their children’s learning at home and in the community. School will support students with disabilities, ELL's and high need student groups by including (but not limited to) more hands on activities, technologies (including CD's, laptops, audio of text), build more group activities, and make learning concepts visible.  School will clearly communicate school policies to all families in their home language. The school will strengthen families’ knowledge and skills to support and extend their children’s learning at home and in the community.  Consistent messages in newsletters that the school values  Being told that parents are welcome at school assemblies  Community events like Family Game Nights  Parent Engagement Activities every Tuesday  Teachers welcoming parents in the classroom  A range of ways parents can volunteer in the classroom or the rest of the school through the Learning Leaders Program  Parental feedback being sought on a range of issues through PTA and SLT 2018-19 CEP 35 September 2018- May 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Department Team Leads September 2018 - May 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, students, and parents Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, Department Team Leads  Electronic messaging boards  Calendars Translation Services will be utilized via NYC Department of Education translation services. A directory of community resources and activities that link to student learning skills and talents, including summer programs for students will be shared. The school will also offer workshops to inform families of the high expectations and standards children are expected to meet in each grade level and provide ways for families to support the expectations and learning at home. Through school-community partnerships, facilitate families’ access to community-based programs (e.g., health care and human services) to ensure that families have resources to be involved in their children’s education. School will provide workshops and materials for parents on typical development and appropriate parent and school expectations for various age groups. School will also offer suggestions for parents on home conditions that support learning at each grade level. School will partner with local agencies to provide regular parenting workshops on nutrition, family recreation or communication; and provide training and materials for parents on how to improve children’s study skills or learning in various academic subjects. Teachers will make regular homework assignments that require students to discuss with their families what they are learning in class. A directory of community resources and activities that link to student learning skills and talents, including summer programs for students will be shared. The school will also offer workshops to inform families of the high expectations and standards children are expected to meet in each grade level and provide ways for families to support the expectations and learning at home. Parents participate on the School Leadership Team. PTA official board will conduct a survey of parents to identify volunteer interests, talents and availability, matching these resources to school programs and staff-support needs. Through school-community partnerships, facilitate families’ access to community-based programs (e.g., health care and human services) to ensure that families have resources to be involved in their children’s education. Students and families will be connected to service-learning projects in the community Progress will be shared among all stakeholders – including parents. Successes will be celebrated. Parents will be invited to monthly assembly programs, Family Nights {ELA and Math, PTA meetings, Parent/Teacher conferences, monthly parent engagement activities, and Parent workshops} Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentor Teachers, Teachers, September 2018- May 2019 Borough coordinators, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Lead Teachers, 2018-19 CEP 36  3b – Parent and Family Engagement students, and parents Department Team Leads If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Bed Stuy Head Start for students and families in PK; NY Smiles Dental Program (van); 81st Pct; the Food Bank NYC, UFT Dial a Teacher; NYC Health Department, and Pennies for Patients. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development is embedded in the staff’s professional work day [Mondays]; information is shared during Lunch and Learns/Chat and Chews; Parent Engagement activities are scheduled [monthly]; Administrators, Instructional Leads, Mentors will visit classes and provide timely, action-oriented feedback to the teachers; substitute teachers and ATR’s provide coverage; costs for supplemental compensation as the collective bargaining agreements. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be shared among all stakeholders – including parents. Successes will be celebrated. Parents will be invited to monthly assembly programs, Family Nights {ELA and Math, PTA meetings, Parent/Teacher conferences, monthly parent engagement activities, and Parent workshops. Information will be shared monthly, however, critical checkpoints are:  Beginning share point: September 2018  Mid-Year Review: February 2019 End Year Review: May 2019 Progress is shared via Parent Teacher Conferences, Promotion in Doubt Conferences, and Parent Engagement Tuesdays. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, all teachers will be a part of Teacher Teams will review Response to Intervention (RtI) assessment data to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 5C - Progress - SLT meets regularly to ensure that school is meeting the needs of the community (parents). Topics for Parent Engagement Tuesdays are planned grade-wide based on the needs of the parents/students. Citywide Conference days are planned; when parents cannot attend any sessions, teachers communicate via Class DOJO and set personal days/times as per the parent's convenience to ensure that communication on progress is shared. Promotion in Doubt conferences are scheduled as well. February/March 2019 - Progress Monitoring - feedback from (NYC DoE) Parent Surveys; school created parent needs assessment surveys, and the new ESSA Accountability Report will be used to measure (assess) progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students' need for AISservices are determined by the NYS ELAassessment scores, teacher assessment(s), ELL, and/or holdover status Students' need for AISservices are determined by the NYSMath assessment scores, teacher assessment(s) and holdover status Students' need for AISservices are determined by the NYSScience (Gr.4) assessment scores, teacher assessment(s) and holdover status Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AISServices are provided through small group instructional groups AISServices are provided within the instructional school day AISServices are provided through small group instructional groups AISServices are provided within the instructional day AISServices are provided through small group instructional groups AISServices are provided within the instructional school day Interventionin ELAis provided during our AISperiods; and during small group instruction within class instruction within class instructional time. The ELACCLSaligned program is Harcourt Journeys (K-5) Interventionin Math is provided during our AISperiods; and small group instruction within class instructional time. The Math CCLSaligned program is Harcourt's Go Math (K-5) TheHarcourt Core Science program is used as students are instructed in the Life, Earth, and Physical Sciences. During the Science instructional periods, students explore the Scientific Method where investigation, experimentation, and interpretations facilitate conclusions and further inquiries. 2018-19 CEP 39 AISServices are provided through small group instructional groups AISServices are provided within the instructional school day At-risk counseling is provided through small group and/or individual sessions Servicesare provided within the instructional day Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) We also have Enrichment Science Specialists to provide additional hands-on instruction TheHarcourt Social Studies program is used for students providing students instruction to develop critical thinking and research skills. Counselingis provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, and Social Worker (SBST). Additionally, the SBSTholds weekly conferences with teachers to develop appropriate goals and services for students. Peer mediation, weekly PPC/SIT team meetings and parent workshops are also incorporated to provide intervention services to at-risk students Students' need for AISservices are determined by teacher assessment(s) and holdover status Studentswill receive counseling first by their mandate (if any) and upon the counselor's schedules. The counselor will have to make available 30 minutes 2-3 days a week for at-risk counseling. PPC/SIT Teams will meet to discuss continuation of services or recommendation of services inside the school or to connected/partner agencies 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 50 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to provide for the students with agency referrals based on their need(s); attendance counseling, uniforms, items for their use (based on need(s)). The Attendance Teacher will make intentional and focused home-visits to homes and NYC DOE liaisons to assess families' needs and create an uninterrupted process to ensure students come to school on-time. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 41  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 42  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrators will attend Hiring Hall, Recruitment Fairs and invited to interview at our school. Teachers will be invited to participate in Professional Development sessions in-house and outside of the school building. Teachers are also paired with in-house mentors who meet regularly to ensure quality support and engagement. Teachers will also have the opportunity to inter-visit classes within the school building. Whenever necessary, teachers will visit schools outside of the school building for professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff will be invited to participate in Professional Development sessions in-house and outside of the school building. Teachers are also paired with in-house mentors who meet weekly to ensure quality support and engagement. Teachers will also have the opportunity to inter-visit classes within the school building. Whenever necessary, staff members will visit schools outside of the school building for professional development. Administrators will provide feedback after each observational visit. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 43  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parent Involvement includes:  Parent meetings/workshops to inform parents of new curricula;  Parents are invited to escort preschoolers to class in the morning and prepare them for the instructional day; Open House for incoming 3K and Pre K families 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS 262's instructional focus has been Assessment of Learning and we have been engaged in cultivating strong assessment practices surrounding this school wide focus. The over-arching goal of our Professional Development plan is to improve assessment of learning to cultivate a culture of self-regulated, purposeful, dedicated learners. Grade level and AIS Team teachers meet weekly to study student data and/or curriculum in order to make team decisions and maximize instruction. Teacher Team members are charged with studying data of the grade team and leading inquiry work to identify standards of focus in ELA and Math. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 CEP 44  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 139,342 63,989 N/A N/A 995,522 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5; Part 4B Section 5; Part 4B X X Section 5: Part 4B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 CEP 45  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 262, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 262 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 262, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 49  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name El Hajj Malik El Shabazz - PS 262 Borough Brooklyn School Number 262 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joeletha Ferguson Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Iris Torres Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Rahesha Amon Assistant Principal Desiree Barter Coach NA School Counselor Carol Gibson Parent NA Parent Coordinator Isabelle Garner Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 300 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Running Records (Fountas and Pinnell), Unit tests, and teacher-created assessments to assess the early literacy skills of ELL's. Data from these assessments is used to target and provide intervention instruction on the specific skills the students have not acquired or the language domains they are struggling with. Most of our ELL's - at this age level - seem to be doing fairly well in these assessments as compared to their peers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher Teams meetings, Grade level meetings, and AIS meetings are used to support this effort. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 54  Pre and post benchmark assessments, Unit assessments, baseline assessments, Beginning and End of Year performance assessments, and Periodic assessments are used to identify areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? AIS instruction, small group instruction, and grade level planning interventions are used for intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Different assessments and data is used with RTI Tier 1 research to provide ELL's with research -based instructional strategies and differentiated instruction that will meet their needs and provide academic support within the RTI framework. For students who continue struggle after Tier 1 instruction has been provided and adjusted or modified to meet their needs, then Tiers 2 and 3 interventions will be implemented. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The assessments are: NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math, periodic assessments, benchmark and baseline assessments, and unit assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Structures in place are Grade level meetings, Teacher Team meetings, and AIS meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Our ESL program consists of a pull-out model for all the grades and push in services for some expanding and commanding students that need transitional support. Students are grouped according to age, grade, and when the need arises by level of language proficiency. For the school year 2016-2017, a total of 18 ELL's were receiving English as a Second Language instruction. The program model implemented is heterogeneous (mixed proficiency levels). Students received the minutes of instruction as outlined by CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are scheduled to receive the mandated minutes of ESL instruction weekly as per CR Part 154, 360 minutes for students in the entering and emerging levels of language proficiency; 180 minutes for the students at the transitioning and 2018-19 CEP 55  expanding levels; and 90 minutes for students at the commanding level. Students are grouped by different grades and levels to ensure that all students receive the mandated minutes of English as a New Language instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL instruction follows a multi-disciplinary thematic approach where the literacy instruction in English is integrated into Social Studies, Math and Science. To make content comprehensible and enrich language development, the ENL teacher makes use of instructional strategies to develop cognitive academic skills and content concepts and vocabulary (e.g. presenting information graphically, classifying, comparing and contrasting). The ENL teacher will align instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) by designing activities that promote higher order thinking processes in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. A literacy-rich classroom where language and learning experiences are embedded in comprehensible input. Planning of lessons using the Enduring Process Model where language and content objectives are integrated to facilitate the acquisition of the academic skills ELL's need to meet the grade level Common Core Learning Standards. Use of research-based scaffolding strategies to help ELL's acquire higher levels of text complexity skills in language and content learning such as, modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, and metacognition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish-speaking students who are administered the NYSITELL are also administered the Spanish LAB if they are entitled to receive services for ELL's to measure their literacy level in their native language. Students who are literate in their native languages are evaluated in the native language by providing them with available translated versions of the test. When translation versions are not available, first, oral translation is provided by a staff member that is fluent in the language or second, by the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit which is contacted via telephone or third, the school seeks a translator through an outside agency (the Big Word). English Language Learners who are literate in their native languages also receive native language support by providing them with bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in content areas. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our plan for SIFE students is to provide them with literacy and content area instruction to help them acquire the skills they need to be on grade level. Instruction will be differentiated and in small groups providing also in the Spanish native language to Spanish speaking SIFE students by our bilingual Spanish ESL teacher.b. Our plan for newcomers is to provide them with ESL instruction geared to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Skills (CALP), differentiated small group instruction in the regular classroom using scaffolding strategies for ELL's, the use of language software, AIS services, and other school programs. ENL instruction will also be differentiated within the groups with activities to increase English proficiency and to develop the academic skills they need to do well in the classroom.c/d Our plan ELL's receiving service for developing and long term ELL's is to provide them with intensive vocabulary instruction and interventions that will help them to continue developing and sharpening the skills in reading and writing which are the NYSESLAT components where they continue scoring expanding in the test and prevent them from scoring commanding. e. Former ELL's continue receiving transitional support services in the areas of reading and writing to prepare them to take the NYS Assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWD's use the same instructional strategies and grade level materials that are used with regular ELL's but are adapted to their needs using scaffolding strategies for ELL's and modified fo the short and long term goals in their IEP's. ELL-SWD's have equal access as well as non-disabled peers to the school's academic interventions, after school programs, Saturday 2018-19 CEP 56  school programs, and extra-curricular activities such as violin, chess in the school, enrichment programs, and sports and arts programs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL- SWD's have equal access as well as non-disabled peers to the school's academic interventions, after school programs, Saturday programs, and extra curricular activities such as violin, chess in the school, enrichment programs, and sports and arts. Students are placed in the recommended class as per the IEP and provided flexible programming (if applicable). Instruction is modified to ensure that students achieve the IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL's who score levels 1 and 2 in the ELA, Math, and content areas assessments receive AIS services during the school day, small group differentiated instruction in the classroom, and are invited to participate in the after school and Saturday programs. The interventions are offered in English. ELL's that are proficient in their native language(s) can use bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, cognates and instructional materials that might be available in other languages. ELL's who scored proficient on the NYSESLAT continue receiving transitional ESL instruction and AIS intervention services as long as they are needed especially on the testing grades. They also receive small group instruction in the classroom, after school services/programs, and Saturday programs. They will continue to receive testing accommodations for two (2) years. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? No new programs will be considered for the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL's have the opportunity as all students in the school to participate in all curricular and extra-curricular programs/activities such as AIS, after school programs, Saturday programs, violin, chess-in-the-schools, sports and arts, and girl mentoring. All notices and/or letters are sent home by the school. The ENL teacher and the Parent Coordinator outreach to the parents of ELL's. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL's receive explicit ESL instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing using scaffolding strategies for ELL's and the Intro English Program. This program follows an instructional path of building linguistic skills through song, chants, and poetry. Reading and writing skills through literature designed for ELL's, and academic skills through content area lessons and activities. The ENL teacher also uses the following supplementary instructional materials to provide additional supports: Phonics and Friends SRA Reading Laboratory Bilingual books Vocabulary through Context Books 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students who enter the ENL program proficient in their native languages continue receiving native language support such as: bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, buddy-system, and translated versions of math exams - if available in the native language to support them as they become proficient in English. 2018-19 CEP 57  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels due to the fact that our instructional materials and intervention resources are age appropriate and correspond to the grade levels of the school. Age and grade levels are also taken into consideration when grouping the students for instruction and small group interventions. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NA 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For new ELL's that enroll throughout the school year, there is a buddy-system coordinated by the school's Guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator which students help the new students (ELL's) to adjust to the new school and have assistance in the classroom. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NA 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers of ELL's will receive Professional Development on Mondays each month throughout the school year in Common Core Learning Standards, best strategies on language acquisition and how to integrate language objectives and content area objectives in instruction. The ENL teacher will attend Professional Development offered by the Brooklyn North Field Support Center and the Office of English Language Learners. The ESL teacher participates in school-based professional development on the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 15% of total hours for all teachers is addressed during Professional Development meetings and sessions. The ENL teacher also provides teachers with Professional Development information on teaching practices, activities, instructional techniques, and authentic assessments for ELL's. The Administrative Team keeps records of agendas, attendance, etc. of all Professional Development activities conducted in the school. The ENL teacher will attend Professional Development offered by the 2018-19 CEP 58  Borough Support Center and the Office of English Language Learners. The ENL teacher also participates in school based Professional Development on the Common Care Learning Standards, Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL teacher will schedule individual annual meetings with parents. If any parent needs translation the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted via telephone as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to attend monthly PTA meetings at the school and participate in different events such as Donuts for Daddies, Family Math and Literacy Nights, monthly assembly programs, school coordinated sporting events, parents vs. staff basketball games, and holiday celebrations. The school also hosts many informative workshops throughout the school year - many of them coordinated by the Parent Coordinator in cooperation with the PTA such as fire safety, Asthma, AED/CPR, NYS Exams, financial literacy, obtaining the TASC (GED), and referrals to Community-Based organizations services are made available to families. The school has also implemented literacy, math, and assessment workshops not only to inform the parents about the progress their children are making but to also provide them with resources and strategies that they can use to help their children at home. Notices, fliers, and handouts are translated in different languages if necessary. The school also utilizes staff members fluent in other languages for oral translation and/or the NYC DOE's Translation Unit via telephone. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joeletha Ferguson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: El Hajj Malik El Shabazz School DBN: 16K262 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joeletha Ferguson Title Principal Desiree Barter Assistant Principal Isabelle Garner Parent Coordinator Iris Torres ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Carol Gibson Teacher/Subject Area Rahesha Amon Teacher/Subject Area 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 8/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K262 School Name: EL HA Superintendent: Evelyn Santiago The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S./I.S. 262 determines the primary language spoken by each parent through informal interviews/conversations and by looking at the information he/she provided in the “ethnicity form” during his/her child’s registration. The primary source of this information however, is the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) which is reviewed by the ELL Coordinator of the school in collaboration with the school pupil accounting secretary. If the language spoken by the parent is Spanish our bilingual ELL coordinator, Spanish Foreign Language teacher or bilingual Paraprofessional will translate for Spanish speaking parents. For other low incident languages such as Arabic, Bengali, etc. the school secretary, assistant principal, ELL coordinator, parent coordinator or Language Access coordinator will contact the Translation and Interpretation unit to request an over the phone translator for these parents. The school’s pupil accounting secretary records and maintains this information in each student’s cumulative folder (copies of the HLIS and the ATS generated notice of admission –QADM) and also the school’s file of emergency cards for each class. 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are English, Spanish, and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School calendar, Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher conferences, PTA meetings, Breakfasts with the Principal, After School Programs. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night - September Parent-Teacher Conferences - November, March interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 63  Promotion in Doubt Meetings - January, February Guidance Counselor reaching out to parents regarding the Middle School Application 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome Poster is placed on a prominent location where it will be visible to all visitors that come inside the school building. Parents will be provided the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. For any parent that indicates the need of translation services on the Language ID Guide the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted starting with the security officer at the security desk, personnel in the main office, the Parent Coordinator, the Language Access Coordinator Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will review the responses provided by the parents on the parent surveys to determine if any adjusments or changes need to be made to our procedures to provide Translation and Interpretation Services to parents. 2018-19 CEP 64 
