2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K264 School Name: P.S. 264 BAY RIDGE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS Principal: MARISA BOLOGNINO 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bay Ridge Elementary School for the Arts 3300001243 K – 5 371 89 Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 718 630 1650 School Number (DBN): 20K264 718 630 1655 Fax: Phone Number: Marisa A. Bolognino Mbologn@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Marisa Bolognino Myrna De La Rosa Paullette Healy Donna Ceman Sabah Elmardi N/a Jodi Mondiello District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent: 371 89 Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 Karina Costantino Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 630 1650 Phone Number: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov 718630 1655 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director: Cheryl Watson Harris 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89 Street Brooklyn, NY 11203 cwatson10@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7187593900 Phone Number: 7187594862 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marisa A.Bolognino Myrna De La Rosa Paullette Healy Lisa Gutwirth Donna Byron Ceman Jodi Mondiello Tara DeVito Ayah Rifai Monica Ayala *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable UFT Elected member UFT Elected member Parent member 2018-19 CEP 5  Name MarisolOrtiz-Minan Sabah Elmardi Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent member Parent member Parent member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of the Bay Ridge Elementary School for the Arts is to develop the academic, social and civic skills of our students in an atmosphere that fosters independent thinking and learning. With a highly effective partnership between the school, community and home, our students will achieve high standards of excellence. We believe that an 2018-19 CEP 9  ARTS based education program will develop students who are Active learners, Responsible citizens, Team players and Self-confident young men and women. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S.264 is a zoned elementary school which had an enrollment of 464 students, from K through 5 during the 2017-2018 school year. 63% of students qualify for free lunch making us Title 1 eligible. 2017 - 2018 was our first year of Title 1 eligibility and we provided Targeted Assistant services. In the 2018-2019 school year only 58.7% of the School population is Title 1 eligible. The school population demographics for 2018-19 are 3% Black, 34% Hispanic, 49% White, and 14% Asian students. The student body includes 15% English language learners, and 25% students with disabilities. Boys account for 51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 49%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017 - 2018 was 95%. We have also focused on our academic core by continuing to develop rigorous curriculum. As a member of the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project improving the reading and writing skills of our students across the curriculum was our focus. The June Instructional Report based on the NYS ELA assessment shows that this focus was fruitful. Our students outperformed the citywide average across grades and writing standards. Our school applies the workshop model protocols to all curricula areas and encourages student leadership and independence. Our children's voice and choice is important to us and is respected and valued. Students are independent thinkers who take ownership over their own learning and use rubrics, checklists and learning progressions to engage in self-assessment, reflection, and goal settings. Our Parent Engagement activities seek to invite our families in to participate in monthly school activities such as Lego night, School Wellness Fair, Movie Night, Math and Literacy nights, International Pot luck Night, Attendance awards, Math workshops, Marquis Studio, Mother's Day Tea, Donuts with Dad, Recitals, community Night, Band Parent Meetings. Our Parent Coordinator provides workshops on IEP's, Stress Management, Autism 101, Mental Health, Middle School applications to name a few. We have partnerships with Grandma's Love, NY Edge, NYU Langone Seniors in Touch,to name a few. Translations services are available through the NYCDOE Language Interpretation Unit for telephone conferences. Pupil Path allows translation of information which aligns with the home survey completed by the parent. PS 264 works with their C.O.B NY EDGE formally SASF to provide after school programs and nightly ESL Parent program for any parent in our community who would like to learn English. We are in the process of shifting our pedagogy in Mathematics. Working with the Algebra for All initiative and with Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning we are using multiple sources of instructional materials to provide students with instruction that is thoroughly aligned with the grade level standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 264 special student populations. _  We are a barrier free site and serve the needs of students with orthopedic and other health impairments. Many of these students have poor attendance records due to chronic health issues and/or transportation challenges  We also serve military families residing on the Fort Hamilton Army Base. Military children change schools frequently, sometimes coming from schools and states that have not implemented common core standards. 2018-19 CEP 10  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of strength include our program of rigorous, common core aligned units of study in core academic and arts disciplines. We are entering our third year of Teacher's College with the emphasis on writing. The mission of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project is to help young people become avid and skilled readers, writers, and inquirers. They accomplish this goal through research, curriculum development, and through working shoulder-to-shoulder with students, teachers, and school leaders. The organization has developed state-of-the-art tools and methods for teaching reading and writing, for using performance assessments and learning progressions to accelerate progress, and for literacy-rich content-area instruction. Teacher participate in common planning weekly. Teachers meet with Principal, AP, Early Literacy Coach and Math Coach to assure targets are being met and formative and summative assessments are leading instruction. Teachers are provided with professional development in Teacher's College, Literacy for All, Advance Literacy which is a district initiatitive. Teachers were provided with a survey for professional development based on data and topics they feel they could use additional support in. We have a vital arts program both during the school day and in the after school hours. We have an excellent record of meeting the needs of English Language Learners (ELL). The majority of our students move from ELL status to English Language proficiency in one or two years. Aligned with the goals and priorities of District 20 we began an inquiry process focused on our students with disabilities this year. Teacher teams looked closely at the challenges faced by these students and implemented research based scaffolds and supports to accelerate their growth. We educate over 85% of our students with disabilities in the least restrictive environment. We have a strong partnership with our District 75 co-located school, PS 231 with 9 students in full day inclusion. We have benefited from the expertise of our D 75 partner in our professional learning of skills and strategies to meet the needs of our most challenged learners. We have also been the beneficiary of close ties with community leaders, resulting in grants from the City Council and our Borough President The 2017-2018 school year saw our school continue to grow and flourish. New York Assessment scores grew in ELA from 58% to 63% Proficient and Math Scores increased from 50% to 54.4 %. We continue to be highly regarded by families in the community. Our arts program continued to develop and thrive with an after school component in collaboration with our Beacon Program partner, New York Edge (formerly SASF). All together our after school arts program served over 141 students in grades k – 5. Family involvement in our arts programs has increased in an effort to strengthen our family and community ties and develop higher levels of trust. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K264 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 480 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 24 26 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 63.1% % Reduced Lunch 12.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 32.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 50.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.08 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 63.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 66 14 95.0% 5.0% 22.7% 2.9% 12.1% 1.5% 2 0% 6.8 54.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 school year was our second year of implementation of the Teacher's College Reading Units of Study and our third year of implementation of the Writing Units of Study. We have seen a dramatic transformation in the reading and writing of our students. Students are developing a genuine love of reading and choosing reading as an enjoyable activity. We have invested heavily in professional development in this area. In past years our teachers have looped with students from K to 1, from 2 to 3 and from 4 to 5. We have suspended this practice in order to ensure that teacher have an opportunity to practice and become more proficient in the teaching of the units at their current grade level. Overall, PS 264 has made gains in both ELA and Math this year. PS 264 scores increase in ELA from 58.3% in 2017 to 63% in 2018. We have also continued our efforts to transform math instruction throughout the building. Last year we began working in a departmental model in grades 4 and 5 as part of our participation in the Algebra for All initiative. We have taken the work a step further with professional development from Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning that focused on our fourth and fifth grade. Grades k-3 received training during prior years. We believe this shift in instruction increased our math score from 50% in 2017 to 54.4% in 2018. We will continue our work in this area going forward. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Math teachers in grades 4 and 5 will receive professional development from Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning that will focus on project-based learning opportunities with scaffolds and supports for all students, including students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and advanced students. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Standards aligned instructional units in mathematics will be implemented at all grade levels. All students September 18 - June 19 Classroom teachers Metamorphosis Math professional development across grades, from Math team and on-site staff developer, EngageNY , specialty groups, professional development days, lab sites, inter-visitations and peer observations September 2018 - June 2019 Math Coach Administrators Classroom teachers Math Coach Administrators Grade 4 and 5 math general education teachers and special education teachers, math coach Collaborative Action Research Project based on looking at data to create a tool box of mathematical strategies to solve problems C.A.R.P Ongoing Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, Math Coach CARP Members How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning with Back to School night in September and continuing throughout the year on Parent Engagement Tuesdays we will be keeping parents abreast of the curricular units of study. Teachers will provide families with clear, easy to follow curriculum maps and study guides for topics to be assessed. Math Coach and Staff will provide activities and test taking strategies for parents to utilize with children when they are home. The workshops will take place weekly with the an emphasis on a specific grade for the week. Math Coach and teachers will host Math Fun Night. Parent - Inquiry Workshops 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for:  Metamorphosis T and L PD costs  Algebra For ALL Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students progress in math will be monitored after each standard based unit of study. Teacher will use data to create small group instruction and spiral standards based on need. Teachers will create kid friendly rubrics as well as have students set goals for all students. Administration and the math coach will analyze school wide, grade wide and class trends. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Math portfolio (exemplars) assessment documentation. Unit assessments State Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We have worked since the inception of the school to create a safe supportive environment for our students and families. We have tried to ensure that all families, including non-English speakers, have access to the information they need to assist in the education of their children. In addition, with a zero tolerance policy for bullying, we are engaged in a program of character education aimed at establishing a common language for conflict resolution (Zones of Regulation). With a very low suspension rate our guidance counselor has been examining the OORS incident reports and has determined that some of our most at risk students are those who are living in single parent homes and those with recent family changes such as divorce or the loss of a parent. We have also been made aware of incidents of inappropriate on line behavior such as cyber bullying and the posting of inappropriate videos. We have addressed these issues with families and will be expanding parent training on monitoring children's on line presence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all classes will engage in character education as part of the Zones of Regulation program. The program helps to promote self confidence, respect, increased sense of connection with peers, working collaboratively with others, learning to appreciate similarities and differences, positive conflict resolution strategies and to help reduce stereotyping, teasing, harassment and bullying. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development in Zones of Regulation provided by the school guidance counselor and occupational therapist. All staff Ongoing Guidance Counselor Delivery of lessons on appropriate on line behavior using DOE approved curriculum. All students 10 lessons throughout the year and Occupational Therapist. Classroom teachers and administors. Notices and information will be sent home in the native languages of our families as often as possible. In addition we use IO Assessments to produce report cards. IO Assessments has an automatic translation feature that translates both the content standards and teacher comments of report cards. IO Assessments includes Pupil path – a database that allows parents to access a variety of information about their children. All families with specific benefits for non English speakers. Ongoing Parent coordinator and administration Zones of Regulation workshops for students with IEP's SWD Students Quarterly Guidance Counselor and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will hold monthly parent workshops. Workshops include but are not limited to Stress Management and Mindfulness, Mental Health for Parents and Effective Parenting Tips. Parent coordinator uses a media screen in the main lobby as well as a newsletter with information on various parenting tips, techniques and resources. Anti bullying workshops (Omegaman) are provided for students. . Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 17  Funding for per session for Parent Saturday workshops. Purchase of materials to Zones of Regulations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will see a decrease in incident reports uploaded in OORS by 3%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Behavioral Anecdotal logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017 NYS assessment scores were 50% proficient. In 2018 the math scores increased to 54.4%. The priority is to increase focus on students and create a toolbox of research based strategies and improve instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate as part of a data inquiry team in order to analyze student work products, discern student strengths and weaknesses, research potential strategies and tailor instruction for all students; including students with disabilities, English Language Learners and advanced students measured by the alignment of state exam scores, student scholarship, and Principal Practice Observations. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher team expectations and protocols will be turn keyed at the opening faculty conference. All teachers September 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal Horizontal and vertical teacher teams will meet on an established schedule during professional periods, designated teacher team periods or after school as appropriate. Instructional cabinet will meet with the administration monthly to report on the work of the teacher teams. Participation in the citywide CARP (Collaboration Action Research Project). All teachers Every month Principal and Instructional cabinet members Administrators and staff team members Assistant Principal, CARP TEAM and Math Coach Monthly Principal Monthly Assistant Principal Math Coach and CARP team and Math Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Inquiry team trends and findings will be reported to families through PTA meeting and Parent Coordinator workshops by the Principal or Assistant Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 20  Scheduling common prep time for horizontal and vertical teams. Per Session for Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 100% of the classroom teachers will participate in CARP Strategy for looking at Inquiry Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Unit assessment and portfolio assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are continuing to shift school wide pedagogy to foster student independence and choice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 schools will continue to build coherent instructional and social-emotional supports to improve student achievement for all students, including English Language Learners, students with disabilities and advanced students measured by at least a 3% increase in state exam ELA and math scores. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Participation in the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project to strengthen instruction in reading and writing throughout the school. Administrators and teachers September 2017 - June 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal and Instructional cabinet Progress monitoring of students’ reading and writing through the administration and scoring of on demand reading and writing assignments correlated to the TCRWP units of study. All students Teacher inquiry teams will monitor the growth of focus students and will implement scaffolds and supports to improve student performance. Teacher grade teams, AIS providers and administrators. At the beginning, midpoint and completion of each unit of study. The Math Coach will provide assistance to individual teachers and teacher teams to implement shifts and math practice across the school. Targeted teachers and grades September 2018 - June 2019 Math Coach and administrators. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During parent engagement, families will be introduced to the units of study in reading, writing and math and will be provided with ways to assist their children at home, in particular in the area of instruction. PTA provides workshops in social emotional learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for participation in TCRWP and the associated costs for materials and substitute teacher coverage. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 23  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 70% of formal and informal observation reports recorded in Advance will show developing, effective or highly effective levels of instructional coherence evidencing faithful implementation of the instructional focus and programs of the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher evaluation reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have a cadre of active parents as measured by attendance at a wide variety of activities. However, non-English speaking families are frequently under represented at these activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 65% of students will have family members participate in academic and non-academic workshops and/or activities 4 times during family outreach time on Tuesday or other scheduled activities as measured by sign in sheets by June 2019 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activities will be planned at least six weeks in advance so that invitations and accompanying materials can be sent to the DOE Translation Unit before distribution. ENL students and their families September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principal and Principal, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator Develop a vertical team focused on parent engagement. All families, PTA and SLT leadership Bi Monthly Principal Teachers Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Translation services will be available at meetings using headphones. Non English speaking families Periodic meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are a Beacon program site this year and our partner is the New York Edge (formerly SASF). In partnership with New York Edge we are offering a wide range of after school activities. We offer programming for adults as well as children, such as adult ESL, GED and basic job skills programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling common prep/planning time for members of the parent engagement team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of students will have at least one family member attend 3 academic or non-academic events of the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent coordinator and Beacon program attendance records Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades 3 - 5 who score in the bottom quartile for their grade level in fall assessments. Students in grades4 and 5 who score at level 1 on the NYS Math Exam None at this time Social Studies None at this time At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who demonstrate inappropriate or disruptive behavior in the classroom. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell LLI materials. Orton Gillingham phonic based instruction. Additional guided practice Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group or one to one as appropriate During the school day. Small group During the school day and/or after school Small group guidance meetings, structured play, role playing Small groups During the school day 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic supplies and school uniforms will be provided by the school. At risk guidance will be offered to all families. Food assistance is offered through connections with local food banks. The Beacon program will offer connections to other social service agencies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for recruitment include but are not limited to using CUNY schools, New Teacher Finder, and partnerships with private colleges. In addition, our partnerships with Teacher's College will provide all staff members with access to quality professional development in Reading and Writing. Teachers who attend PD's will turn key information on assigned Mondays. Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning provide all staff members with access to quality ongoing professional development hours. In addition, the Math coach will provide additional PD for teacher's to implement Algebra for All, rubric and task writing. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We partner with Teacher's College to provide in house PD in reading and writing for all classroom teachers. In addition, both classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers have the opportunity to attend specialty workshops at Teacher's College. We also partner with Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning to provide PD in math. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Late in the spring we host groups from the local Pre K centers to visit our kindergarten classes. We encourage families to attend along with their children. We host a kindergarten orientation meeting each June. Our September Parent teacher conference focuses on fostering student independence at the kindergarten level. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our instructional cabinet regularly meets to discuss students baseline and benchmark assessments as well as the administration and scoring of formative and summative assessments. The team then looks at data and reviews curriculum to modify learning. Teachers provide administration of professional developments they need to enhance their growth during IPC conferences. A list is compiled. Administration differentiates professional development among teachers wants and needs. Teacher meets with Chapter leader to decide on MOSL. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5 A, B, C, D, E NA Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal $279,608 NA x NA 2018-19 CEP 32  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local $12,366 NA NA x NA NA 5 A, E NA NA 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 CEP 33  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 264, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 264 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 36  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 264, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 37  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 39  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 41  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 42  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: As part of the ESSA and as indicated in the CR Part 154 our school intends to use the Title III funds to supplement ENL instruction by piloting The Green Bronx Machine Classroom Curriculum program with our ELL students on a small scale before we implement it school wide next year. We are introducing this program as part of our health/wellness campaign in our school. This program combines the art and science of growing vegetables with technology and aligns the content area instruction in an innovative and engaging manner that hooks our students and school community into a complete STEM/STEAM experience. The program will encourage global citizenship and gives the children an opportunity to be real thinkers and problem solvers. The children will be learning to grow, cook and eat vegetables in an urban classroom. The lessons are interdisciplinary – Science, Math and Language Arts. The program will take place on Saturdays from 9 – 12 for approximately 12 sessions beginning on January 5th and running through the end of March 30th. We will be targeting approximately 45 students in K,1st and 2nd grader, current and former ELLs. Our students will be grouped by the data based on the 2018 NYSESLAT scores. We will have 3 groups as most of our students are on the expanding and commanding level. We will of course provide differentiation and scaffold lessons accordingly. The instruction will be delivered in English, as ENL is our instructional model throughout the day as dictated by the parent selection form. Of course, the native language will be validated throughout all of our instruction. Three certified ENL teachers will participate in the Saturday ENL Enrichment Program. We used the data provided from the EDAT program based on the 2018 NYSELAT scores. Of the 13 students tested in Kindergarten in 2018, 2 were commanding ( 1 student advanced from emerging to commanding and 1 student advanced from transitioning to commanding), 8 students showed growth ( 6 students advanced from entering to expanding and 2 advanced from transitioning to expanding) 3 students remained at the same level ( 2 students remained at the expanding level and 1 newly arrived student remained as entering. So overall 77% showed growth and 23% remained on the same level. Of the 10 students tested in the 1st grade, 3 students were commanding ( 1 student advanced from transitioning to commanding and 2 students advanced from expanding to commanding) 1 student advanced from transitioning to expanding and 6 students remained on the expanding level. So overall 40% showed growth and 60% remained on the same level. Of the 14 students tested in the 2nd grade, 4 were commanding (4 students advanced from the expanding level to commanding) 1 student advanced from the transitioning level to the expanding, 1 student advanced from the emerging level to the expanding level, 2 students advanced from the entering level to the emerging level, and 6 students remained at the expanding level. So overall 57% of our students showed growth and 43% remained at the same level. Of the 10 students tested in the 3rd grade 1 was commanding (student advanced from expanding to commanding) 1 student advanced from transitioning to expanding, 1 student advanced from emerging to transitioning, and 7 students remained at the expanding level. So overall 30% showed growth and 70% remained at the same level. Of the 8 students tested in 4th grade 2 students were commanding ( 1 student advanced from transitioning to commanding and 1 student advanced from expanding to commanding) 1 student 2018-19 CEP 43  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information advanced from entering to emerging and 1 student advanced from entering to transitioning, 4 students remained at the expanding level. So overall 50% of our students showed growth and 50% remained at the expanding level. We used the RLAT report to further disaggregate the data and noted that our students continue to remain in the program because they under perform in the area of writing. This of course showing the general trend that writing is the last phase for our ELL students to become proficient in English. In order to meet the needs of our commanding students, Ms. Maloney, our F-status teacher will provide instruction for the overflow of students. The instruction will take place during the day for 1 period per week. This will assist the current ENL teachers so they can continue to focus on servicing their current ENL students. Ms, Maloney will continue to focus on strengthening their reading and writing skills. Letters will go home in September informing the parent that their child has reached the commanding level and will continue to receive 2 periods of support services per week as per the CR Part 154. The letters will be sent home in the preferred language as indicated on the HLIS form. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: It is our intent to have the entire staff have 9 sessions of Reading and Writing professional development provided by the Teachers College Reading and Writing project throughout the year. Two staff developers: Kimberly Fox and Hannah Mead will be working with K-2 and 3-5 teachers. The training will consist of modeling lessons, inter-class visitations, and debriefing sessions in house. The dates for K-2 teachers are as follows:10/15, 10/22, 10/29, 1/28, 2/4, 2/11, 3/25, 4/1, 4/8, 6/10. The following classes will be used as Lab sites – K-101, 1-221, 2-405. The dates for 3-5 are as follows: Cycle 1: 11/2, 11/9, 11/30. For Cycle 2: 1/2, 1/29, 2/15. For Cycle 3: 4/9, 4/16, 4/30. Teachers will also be receiving professional development at Teachers College. There are also specialty groups targeting our ENL students and our Special Education population. We will also take advantage of the Borough Support Center Workshops such as Teaching in a Co-Teaching Class, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and Algebra for All. A grant has been written to continue the Math Metamorphosis training for the 2018 – 2019 school year. The dates to work with Michele Spiere are as follows: 9/27 – grades 4 and 5, 9/28 – 3rd/4th grade bridge and 4th/5th grade bridge classes, 10/9 – grades 4 and 5, 10/25 - 3rd/4th grade bridge and 4th/5th grade bridge classes. Ms. Capetanakis, our Special Ed Liaison will also provide PD on : AIS strategies– whole staff, IEP procedures, RTI & Referrals,Testing Accommodations, Conflict Cycle for paras, aides, and whole staff, FBA/BIP – Sp Ed Teachers, Ms. Isaac, our guidance councilor and Ms. Acevedo, our OT specialist will provide PD –“ Zones Overview for Social Emotional Learning for the whole staff – dates TBD. Our ENL teachers will also be participating in professional development offered by the Brooklyn South Borough Support Center, “Strengthening the Instructional Core thru Advanced 2018-19 CEP 44  Part C: Professional Development Literacies”. Series and Cultivating Knowledge and Building Language by Dr. Nonie Lesaux Study Group the dates are TBD. They will also attend PD provided by the DELLSS throughout the year, dates and topics TBD. Lucia Perez-Medina, District 20 ELL Support Liaison will also be providing PD to our staff –TBD during our 80 minute block in the fall and in the spring to support our teachers. It is also our intent to have in house PD provided by our ENL teachers and Lead teachers during the 80 minutes of PD on Mondays. These PDs will consist of turn keying strategies, putting them into practice and debriefing to brainstorm what works and what needs to be done to move our ELLs to reach proficiency in all classes. These sessions will be provided for K – 2 with special emphasis on strengthening phonemeic awareness and oral language skills. The 3 – 5 sessions will provide specific strategies for teaching tier 2 & 3 vocabulary words, annotating reading materials and assisting the ELLs with the necessary tools to provide evidence based terminology in their writing as dictated by the CCSS and adapting units of study in the TCRWP. Teachers will need to plan according to deliver PS Agendas and mandatory attendance will be taken. The teachers will sign in. Agenda and sign - in sheet kept in a binder in the assistant principal’s office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: There will be three family meetings scheduled for the upcoming year. Our first meeting will be in the fall. It will be an orientation to explain the ENL program and will include a presentation on the Orton Gillingham methodology and how these strategies will assist our ELLs with their reading and writing to support the TCRWP. They will be provided by our ENL teachers: Myrna De La Rosa and Helene Oliver– Bianca Fontanez. Our second meeting will be an invitation to the families to attend a program session with the children to observe the practices of the teacher followed by debriefing and a session on tips for the parents to help their children at home – TBD. The third session will be held in the spring. At this time they will observe a student led demonstration of what they have learning throughout the year. They will be teaching the lesson to each other to demonstrate all they have learned throughout the year – TBD. In addition to these three parent meetings, an additional meeting will be held in the spring to further explain the exiting criteria for the ENL program. At this meeting we will discuss the NYSESLAT, the four modalities and show them various sample questions that will be necessary for them to master to become commanding to exit the program. Letters of invitation will be sent home in the preferred language as indicated on the HLIS form. The agenda and sign-in sheet will be kept on file for each meeting in the ENL binder. Ms. Gonzalez, our parent coordinator reaches out to the parents at the beginning of the school year. The survey of interest is sent out to all the parents and parent workshops are provided based on the interest shown. Notices go home to the parents in the native languages and English to inform parents of these meetings. Translators are generally provided at no cost as we have a very diverse staff and they are willing to provide these services to accommodate our ELL population. 2018-19 CEP 45  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Our parent coordinator, is excellent at bringing the ELL parents in. She asks them to volunteer in numerous ways even if they are unable to communicate much. They can help In a variety of ways. For example, they don’t really need much English to partake in these events: Family Literacy Night, Pumpkin Patch Halloween Dance, Ragamuffin Parade, Math Camp Night, Einstein Night and Movie Night. We have adopted Pupil Path as a tool for parents to see their children’s grade, communicate with teachers and to follow teacher recommendations on line. We also adopted Schoolcnxt.com as another tool for parents to engage in our school community. Ms. Gonzalez keeps a log of all the parent workshops and a running log of parent’s concerns and we try to address and reach out to our immigrant population. Some of the activities scheduled for parent engagement are: Fire Safety Presentation, Smoke House Presentation, Dial a Teacher Workshop, Rite Aide, Flu Shot, Middle School Orientation Night, Family Fun a Thon, Support Beyond the Classroom, Anti-Bullying, Art Exhibit, 4th and 5th grade Open House, Science Exhibit K-2, Science Exhibit 3-5, Child Abuse Prevention , Mental Health Workshop and a Parent Workshop with IEP Liaison – How to Read an IEP. In addition to the these activities, Ms. Gonzalez has purchased Translation Units to assist the ELL parents when they attend PTA meeting. Bake Sales and numerous activities for Relay for Life Nights throughout the year: Uno’s Dough Raiser, Movie Night among a few. Light Up PS 264, Paint the Night with Ms. Meehan, Relay for Life Hip Hop, Relay for Life Dough Raiser, Relay for Life Basketball Clinic, and the PS 264 Annual Variety Show. These are a few dates and parent workshops that have been scheduled during Parent Engagement: October, 2, 9, 16, 23 and 30 Math Parent Workshops November 1, 2018 Healthy Homes Presenter: Department of Health December 6th, 2018 Stress Management & Mindfulness Presenter: Daniel Fayerberg December 13, 2018 Understanding Your Child’s IEP Presenter: Ms. Capetanakis January 3, 2018 DOT Parent Workshop January 10, 2018 Mental Health for Parents Presenter: Daniel Fayerberg February 7, 2018 Autism 101 Presenter: Daniel Fayerberg March 14, 2018 Effective Parenting Tips Presenter: Dana Isaac Time: 8:45 am 2018-19 CEP 46  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. The per session budget will be used to pay 3 teachers for 3 hours per week for Saturday school instruction. There will be 12 program sessions. 2 pre session planning meetings and 2 post session evaluation meeting 1 Supervisor at per hour (fringe included) for 12 - 3 hour sessions = 2201.80 3 teachers at per hour (fringe included $61.16) for 12 sessions of 3 hours per session = 6,605.28 Curriculum planning and post program evaluation - 3 teachers at per hour for 6 hours = 1100.88 none none Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other $1975.00 (1) The Green Bronx Machine Classroom Curriculum none none none none none none 2018-19 CEP 47 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 11983.84 TOTAL 11983.84 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name Bay Ridge Elementary School for the Arts Borough Brooklyn School Number 264 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Patrice Edison Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Myrna De La Rosa Teacher/Subject Area Annette Yarmush/AIS Teacher/Subject Area Catherine Capetanakis/Sp Ed Related-Service Provider Lauren Isola/ Speech Provider Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Georgia Mousouroulis Coach N/A School Counselor Dana Isaac Parent Parent Coordinator Shirley Chin Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 49  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 432 Total number of ELLs 77 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.82% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. At P.S. 264, we use the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Kit. Early fall testing of our Kindergarten students has indicated that more than half of our ENLs are coming into Kindergarten with some literacy skills. They are able to identify a significant number of letters and/or sounds, identify the title of books, use proper directionality and are able to discuss what they see in the picture, make some predictions, and inferences. The remaining students have very few literacy skills. They identify few or no letters/sounds, are not able to discuss the text and are unable to verbalize their thoughts. We also use the Oral Language Assessment from Mondo’s, Let’s Talk About It! This assessment identifies the student’s oral language proficiency level and allows us to plan lessons explicitly to scaffold the language skills necessary for reading comprehension. This is very important because a child’s oral language must be developed before written material can be comprehended. Based on the outcome of both of these assessments we place the children in groups accordingly to 2018-19 CEP 50  maximize effective instruction for our ENLs. Their targeted needs are being addressed during small group instruction during their Literacy Block and throughout the day. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In September we look at the NYSESLAT scores closely to see if our students are meeting the AYP. According to 2014 spring scores 92% of our students met the AYP. This information gives us a very good indication that our program is highly effective. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses F & P to initially screen our students to determine their reading levels and the Oral Language Assessment to gauge their oral language level. We also use the data provided by the state ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT assessments to gather data. The AMAO estimator tool is also used to identify our "at risk" students based on the trends. This data is used to place our students in the appropriate groups to maximize instruction and give them the appropriate supports to achieve academic success. During the Literacy Block, ESL/AIS teachers use the push- in model targeting those students to ensure they are receiving rigorous academic content with support in a Tier I setting. Conversations are deliberate and purposeful to develop their oral language skills. Both ENL/AIS teachers have been trained in Orton Gillingham and these strategies are employed to aid our “at risk” students. After monitoring these students and assessing them, if we deem they are not making the necessary gains we then move them on to Tier II Instruction. At this time they will receive a “Double Dose” of instruction to give them extra attention in their areas of weakness in a small group. Intensive Intervention Tier III, one to one will then be employed if enough progress is not shown after assessment in the Tier II phase. Our purpose is to become problem solvers and take the time to develop a program that best suites the needs of our ENLs with the sole purpose of meeting the needs of our ENLs in the hopes of avoiding inappropriate referrals. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We also use the data provided by the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT to drive our instruction. We generally focus on oral language and listening skills with our entering, emerging and transitioning students along with strengthening their phonological awareness. Our emphasis with our expanding students is to further advance their reading and writing skills to achieve commanding and a high level of comprehension with the ability to discuss by providing evidence and develop the ability to synthesize non- fiction material as the CCSS demand. There is a high degree of correlation between the Fountas and Pinnell assessment and the results from the NYSITELL. Students who are identified as entering on the NYSITELL generally score low on the Fountas and Pinnell as well. They do not have the literacy skills to identify letters/sounds and are unable to express their thoughts. Our expanding students have a higher level of literacy skills, along with phonological awareness and have the ability to express themselves in complex sentences, make inferences and synthesize information. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 51  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 264 uses various models to provide instruction that best meets the needs of our diverse population. a. We presently have a self contained ENL kindergarten class. They are serviced in a heterogenous group. In the 1st grade, we use the pull-out model to meet the needs of our entering, emerging,transitioning students and push-in model for our expanding/commanding students. They are serviced in homogeneous groups. Our 2nd graders are serviced using the pull-out model, using both heterogenous/ homogenous grouping. Our 3rd /4 th grade students are serviced using the push-in model in a hetergenous grouping. The K,1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4 th grade students are supported by the ENL teachers using the supplemental materials provided by the Core Knowledge/Expeditionary Learning ELA programs. Additional intervention services are provided by the ENL/AIS teachers using Orton Gillingham strategies to strengthen phonogical awareness. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per the CR Part 154-2 chart we provide the mandated services. Our entering, emerging, and transitioning ENL students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction using the push-in/pull-out model during ELA or content area instruction. Our expanding and commanding ENL students receive 180/90 minutes of ELA or content area instruction using the push-in /co-teaching model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Area instruction in Science and Social Studies is part of the push-in/pull-out model. Our ENL teachers work closely with the classroom teachers to plan units of study to ensure that all students have access to the same challenging content. In alignment with the CCSS, much attention is given to the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing to the students with emphasis in response to fiction/non - fiction text. The ENL teachers use the supplemental materials from the Core Knowledge/ Expeditionary Learning programs front loading the children with the necessary vocabulary to make the material comprehendible. In addition, the National Geographics Window - Language, Literacy & Vocabulary program is used. This program lends itself to visually clarify concepts for our ELLs. We also use the Newbridge Discovery Links Big Book series to enhance and clarify content instuction. We are currently implimenting Math in Focus Singapore Math which is aligned with the CCSS and is extremely vigorous. We will also be implementing the Teacher's College Writing program in response to needing a more formal writing program across the grades as the classroom teachers felt that what is currently offered in Core Knowledge and Expeditionary Learning was not enough. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not have TBE/DL programs in our school. We deliver our instruction in English. We do however have staff members available who speak Spanish, Arabic, Urdu and Chinese to help us determine the level of fluency in their native language and to assist with translation as needed. Since we have Kindergarten thru 4 th grade most of their formal 2018-19 CEP 52  schooling has only been in English. For our Spanish speaking students they are administered the Spanish LAB once eligibility is determined. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a.We currently do not have any SIFE students as a fifth year school. We don’t anticipate having any SIFE students for at least three years. Should we have students in the future, we will carefully check there records to determine their eligibility for testing. We will review any testing data that is available. We will administer the oral language questionaire and LENS if we feel that out student has had interrupted education in literacy and math two years below their grade level. We will sit with our support staff ( ENL, AIS, Speech ect.) to develop an action plan using the RTI model to target the areas of weakness in all subject areas. Through small group instruction and one to one conferencing, we aim to push this student to develop basic literacy skills and math skills that will accelerate achievement. Frequent monitoring and assessment for adjustment in academic difficulties will ensure that we are helping our SIFE student. Ideally, we would also be able to fund extra sessions of intensive language instruction with Title III monies. b.Most of our students are considered newcomers since they have been here less than three years. Our ENL teachers use specific instructional strategies and use appropriate materials that are rich in visual content and will help acclimate them to a school setting.Our ENL teachers endeavor to get them started with "survival English" to help them cope with their day to day activities. Our ENL teachers use balanced literacy strategies in their instruction and makes the language taught relevant to their everyday life. The classroom teachers sets up a buddy/peer to help in class, allows for extra time to respond, additional listening center time, additional computer time ect… to support our ELLs. The classroom teachers attend PD throughout the year to acquire strategies and develop differentiated activities. As we grow, our newcomer students who are in testing grades will be supported with supplemental after - school programs to develop testing sophistication. c.We currently have four developing 4 to 6 year students in our ENL program. We will use our data in performance test, ELA, Math, and the NYSESLAT to determine the areas of weakness to better service our ELLs that have been receiving instruction for 4 to 6 years. It has been our experience that these children are verbal with a high level of comprehension. They tend to do poorly on the standardized tests because of their low level reading and writing skills. We will take a close look at the ELA and NYSESLAT subtest to develop instruction to target these areas next year. We will incorporate those test taking skills in our tasks to reflect the four modalities of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. We will employ the RTI model to provide “at risk” services, after-school programs and Title III programs. d.We currently do not have any long term ELLs at P.S. 264. As stated above the strong use of data will guide our instruction to better prepare our students for the standardized exams and ensure their academic success of our long term ELLs. We will also look into other factors impacting the student performance. The implementation of the RTI model will be used first to help our ELLs. On going communication with the parents of these students will help to determine if further evaluation is warranted. Students that are found to need additional support will be evaluated and receive mandated SETTS services, after - school programs, Saturday Test Prep and Title III programs. e. Our former ELLs will continue to receive an additional 90 minutes of support services for commanding students as dictated by cr part 154, after-school programs, AIS, Saturday Test Prep and participate in Title III programs as needed. They will also receive testing modifications for a minimum of 2 years after they reach the commanding level. 2018-19 CEP 53  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use manipulatives and visuals, and other methodologies to address their indiviual needs in order to introduce and revisit topics covered by their classroom teachers. Teachers modify activities, assessments, and curriculum needs to meet the needs of the ELL-SWDs. They also intergrate strategies used with ICT teachers, speech providers, and AIS teachers. To accelerate language development, teachers integrate the use of technology as a way to deepen their understanding in Science, Social Studies, and Math. To facilitate oral language development in English we use the Mondo component " Let's Talk About It!" along with listening activities to further develop their language skills. To further insure that our students are provided access to academic content areas and accelerate english language development our ENL teachers use the supplemental guide materials provided by the Core Knowledge/Expeditionary Learning ELA program and guided by the IEP document. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL, AIS, Speech providers, and Guidance work closely with ICT teachers to ensure that all ELL-SWDs receive instruction that corresponds with what they are learning in the classroom using the push-in model in order to minimize the time spent out of the room. Flexible scheduling ensures they are learning alongside their non - disabled peers in the ICT classroom setting. Additionally, if pulling out is necessary, we ensure they are learning with their non - disabled peers in the ENL program. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program is as follows: Our Tier I intervention occurs during the ELA push-in model. Ms. De La Rosa pushes in to the 3 rd /4th grade ELA class along with Ms. Yarmush, the AIS teacher to service both the ENL/IEP students with the least amount of disruption. Ms. Saviolakis pushes- in during the Math period to service the IEP students and both ENLs with IEPs to provide instructional supports with the least amount of disruption and to fulfull the mandatated service required by the IEPs. We use the data from the assessments to drive our instruction and to form small group instruction to reteach concepts in lessons previously taught in our Tier II intervention. If the students are still not grasping the concepts, we then move on to the Tier III intervention which is one to one reteaching. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to provide high quality instruction for our ENL students and align our program to meet the needs of all of our students. As previously discussed, we will be implimenting the Teacher's College Writing program to our ELA program as our teachers felt there was not enough writing in the Core Knowledge/Expeditionary Learning ELA programs. We endeavor to surpass our present level of success in our ENL program and continue to develop high quality professional development for our staff. We will eliminate the self contained ENL kindergarten class. Ms. Oliver will be servicing the K-2 students and Ms. De La Rosa will be servicing the 3-5students and Ms. Maloney will service any overflow of students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did decide to discontinue our self-contained ENL kindergarten program. We felt that isolating our ELLs was having a detrimental effect on our ELLs. We felt that integrating them in a general ed setting would give them more exposure to high quality peer conversations and interactions as opposed to only hearing proper english modeled by the ENL teacher. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ESL program uses both the push-in/pull-out model and the instruction is completely aligned with the topics covered in class if it is necessary to pull out the students. They participate in all the enrichment programs music, theater, visual arts, and physical education as their monolingual counterparts. We also offer" studio time" which is an enrichment program overed twice a week across the grades based on the students interest. We offer a Title III program in the spring to prepare our students for the NYSESLAT and Saturday Test Prep is also offered to our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 54  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our teachers use a variety of materials with their students. The classroom teachers utilize the ELL component of their programs to insure that their needs are being addressed. We have a native language lending library to support our students with their native language but we do not have textbooks or a literacy program as we do not have a TBE/DL programs.These include: Core Knowledge/ Expeditionary Learning– our core ELA program Teacher's College Writing program Orton Gillingham – Phonics/Intervention program Delta FOSS Science National Geographic - Science and Social Studies, Language, Literacy & Vocabulary! (Non - Fiction) - ESL specific Mondo Oral Language Component Native Language Lending Library Math in Focus Singapore Math Discovery Link 2 Big Book Series - Science/ Social Studies Content (Non - Fiction) Picture Dictionaries K – 2, Glossaries for 3rd /4th grade Technology: Smartboard ( enhance the Math in Focus Program) Think Central Engage NY Brainpop – interactive literacy program Brainpop ESL Starfall – website Reading Eggs – exclusive to ELLs Mion - online reading program SmartTeq - online PD/resources SmartAmp resources 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The teachers at P.S. 264 validate the native language spoken by all students whenever possible. We try to pair the new student with someone who speaks their native language to ensure a smooth and positive transition for the new student. Every effort is made to make the student feel comfortable. We have an established native language lending library which provides the children and parents with books to take home for reading enjoyment and to support their native language development. Picture dictionaries and glossaries are also available as previously mentioned. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We ensure that all required services/resources that support our ENLs are met as dictated by the cr part 154. We try whenever possible to provide these services in the classroom to minimze the disruption of the students day and to minimize the loss of instruction by coming to the students. As previously discussed, we use our data to drive our instruction. In Sept. we assess our students using F & P to assess and place our students in the appropriate reading levels and the Oral Language Assessment to place them in the appropriate oral language literacy level to scaffold lessons according to their oral language level/reading level. This is extremely important as we must develop their oral language in order to develop their literacy skills. We spend a substantial amount of time developing the oral language of our entering and emerging students. Once they reach the transitioning and expanding level our focus shifts to developing their reading and writing skills. We meet our students at whatever their entry point is and work hard to develop the skills necessary to reach success. All the services and resources are appropriate to the age and grade levels of the students as they are completely aligned with the grade curriculm and the CCSS. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 CEP 55  Our teachers use a variety of materials with their students. The classroom teachers utilize the ELL component of their programs to insure that their needs are being addressed. We have a native language lending library to support our students with their native language but we do not have textbooks or a literacy program as we do not have a TBE/DL programs.These include: Core Knowledge/ Expeditionary Learning– our core ELA program Teacher's College Writing program Orton Gillingham – Phonics/Intervention program Delta FOSS Science National Geographic - Science and Social Studies, Language, Literacy & Vocabulary! (Non - Fiction) - ESL specific Mondo Oral Language Component Native Language Lending Library Math in Focus Singapore Math Discovery Link 2 Big Book Series - Science/ Social Studies Content (Non - Fiction) Picture Dictionaries K – 2, Glossaries for 3rd /4th grade Technology: Smartboard ( enhance the Math in Focus Program) Think Central Engage NY Brainpop – interactive literacy program Brainpop ESL Starfall – website Reading Eggs – exclusive to ELLs Mion - online reading program SmartTeq - online PD/resources SmartAmp resources 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In June, we have an orientation meeting with the incoming parent's of our students. At this time the parents are informed of the various programs offered in the school, scheduling and routines. We have various translators available and a question and answering period to ensure that there will be a smooth transition in the fall. Ms. De La Rosa is our liaison to our Spanish community. Ms. Chin, our parent coordinator is our liaison to the Asian community. She speaks Mandrin, Cantonese, and Filipino. Ms. Rifai is our music teacher and is our liaison to the Arabic community. Ms. Isaac, our guidance counselor is also available to address any concerns that parents might have. These are the staff members that are available thoughout the year to ensure a smooth transition for all newly arrived students. Before beginning the school year, the ESL teacher recommends some technological resources and a few suggestions such as: listening center time, visual cards, additional response time, and pairing the student with someone who speaks the same language to assist the newcomer. The ENL teacher then prepares a schedule for tutoring the newcomer during the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time we do not offer an elective. We do however offer Italian and Greek during our “studio time” enrichment program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP 56 N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Ms. De La Rosa and Ms. Oliver will be sent out for PD throughout the year to various PDs provided by the district and by the DELLSS office. They will be responsible for turnkeying the information to the staff during the Monday PD sessions. Other teachers will also be selected to attend PD throughout the year. The following workshops have been scheduled: Both Ms. De La Rosa and Ms. Oliver will be attending the summer PD offered by the UFT on 8/4,8/5, and 8/6 entitled From Inquiry to Independence Launching Student Led Discussions. They will also be participating in an advanced summer session of Orton Gilligham the week of 8/4 provided by our school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At this time we have not had the opportunity to provide PD to assist staff members to assist ELLs who are transitioning into middle school since we are a Pre-K to 4 school. We did however provide the parents with an Information Night to assist the parents in making informed decisions for their children in the near future. Ms. Chin, our parent coordinator, Ms. Isaac, our guidance counselor and Ms. Rifai, our music teacher were instrumental in helping us reach out to the parents to disseminate the appropriate information and provided translators to aid our parents with any questions they had. As part of the new mandates in the cr part 154 we will be sending Ms. De La Rosa and Ms. Oliver out for 50% of their PD that will be offered by the district and by the DELLSS office.The PD will focus on best practices and co-teaching strategies to integrate core content area instruction to support our ENL students. They will both be responsible for turnkeying the information and strategies to assist our ENL students on Mondays during the 80 minute block. Agendas and attendance sheets will be kept in a binder to provide evidence of the PD and towards the15% PD for all staffmembers and for the 175/75hrs of PD required by SED. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As part the cr part 154 and part of the DOE parent engagement time we are required to make an appt with the parents to discuss the goals of our ENL program, discuss the progress the student has made in the program, discuss the results of the spring NYSESLAT, and the areas where the student needs to improve in order to reach the commanding level to exit the program. We can meet in person or via telephone conference. We will use translators on staff or the translation unit services provided by the DOE. A log of all the meetings is kept on file to provide evidence of the parent outreach. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 264 is a fairly new school with an active PTA. We have a wonderful group of parents eager to participate in their children’s education. We have noted that all parents including our ELL parents are excited about our school and are willing to participate in any capacity. We utilize the services of the DOE's translation and interpretation unit for both over the phone interpretation and translation of written documents. We offer workshops on all curriculum areas and programs used by the school to enhance the ability of parents to assist in their child’s education. We have staff members who speak the principal languages of 2018-19 CEP 57  our community making access to the school easier. We provide end of unit celebrations and invite the parents to see all the children have learned. All parents including the parents of ELLs have been extremely receptive to the family oriented atmosphere we have established at P.S. 264. We have Welcome Back to School Night, Literacy Night, Math Camp Night, Einstein Night, a host of activities to raise funds for Relay for Life, our end of year grade award ceremonies and our annual block party celebration to name a few. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. As an arts school we have partnered with many organizations to bring the arts into our school. To name a few: Ms. Rifai our music teacher has partnered with various organizations to bring the ARTS into our school benefiting all of our students: Jazz for Young People at Lincoln Center, the DiCapo OperaTheatre, the Gotham Chamber Opera, Disney Musicals in Schools, and various trips to CSI as well as the Louis Armstrong House Museum. Our 3rd graders wrote their own scene to Matilda under the guidance of Young Shakespeare Write Here Write Now, our theater teacher Ms. Jones-McAdams, and Ms. Nunnari their classroom teacher. Our 4th graders also created their own play, The Haunting of Campsite 264, under the direction of the Lovewell Production Company, our theater teacher Ms. Jones-McAdams, our para Ms. Nagy, with the financial assistance of the PTA. We had another highly successful production of Disney's, Lion King with nearly 100 students participating and too many faculty members collaborating to list. Our school also showcases the individual talents of our teachers by creating "Studio Time" a club like program across the grades self selected by the students. As we all know these are activities that our ELL population may not have exposure to as newly arrived immigrants and are so fantastic for their social and emotional success. We hope to continue to create new programs that will help all our students to become well rounded productive citizens in the near future. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patrice Edison, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 59  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 60 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Bay Ridge Elementary School for the Superintendent: Karina Costantino DBN: 20K264 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kathy Gonzalez Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language Identification Survey and other registration documents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish 636 89 75.5 11 632 90 78.0 11.1 2018-19 CEP 61  Arabic Chinese Albanian Georgian Polish Russian Turkish Urdu Ukrainian 51 21 5 1 1 3 1 1 1 6.3 2.6 .6 .1 .1 .4 .1 .1 .1 51 23 6 1 1 3 1 1 1 6.3 2.8 .7 .1 .1 .4 .1 .1 .1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Report Cards Family Handbook PTA Welcome and Parent Coordinator Welcome Parent Teacher Conference Invitations November March June September September September November March After School Program Information August Event and meeting notices Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. System Generated DOE Translation Services DOE Translation Services DOE Translation Service CBO partner provides School staff School CNXT 2018-19 CEP 62  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to school night September interpretation service(s)? DOE Translation Services and staff volunteers Parent Teacher Conferences November Contracted vendor PTA meetings March Monthly Parent volunteers School CNXT 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use School CNXT which automatically translates messages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members are provided information about the DOE over the phone translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All required DOE signage is in place at the main entrance to the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 63  Various feedback that is used to determine the quality and availability of services would be the learning environment survey, the teachers' and parent coordinator's input. 2018-19 CEP 64 
