2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K268 School Name: P.S. 268 EMMA LAZARUS Principal: SYLVIA FAIRCLOUGH 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Public School 268, The Emma Lazarus School 33318000268 Pre-Kindergarten-Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 18K268 133 East 53 rd Street Brooklyn New York 11203 7187735332 7184937448 Phone Number: Fax: Sylvia Fairclough-Leslie Sfaircl2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Ms. Sylvia Fairclough-Leslie Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JeanCleophat AlphiaWilson Jean Cleophat Jessica Antonelli NA NA District Information Geographical District: 18 Beverly A. Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 East 95 Street Brooklyn New York Superintendent’s Office Address: Bwilkins@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 566-6008 Phone Number: 212 356 7510 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  South Brooklyn Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89 Street Brooklyn NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759-4862 Phone Number: 718 759-4863 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Sylvia Fairclough-Leslie JeanCleophat AlphiaWilson NA NA NA NA CamealaComrie DukensonBernard TanyaLouis Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Wilson Jessica Antonelli Jocelyn Thomas AnthonyGayles JessicaKirkland NishaJohn Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P.S. 268 is to create a safe learning environment, where parents, staff, administration and the community at large collaborate to provide an education that "Inspires Possibilities" for every student. As a team we support our general education students, students with special needs, as well as our English language learners, to move them towards academic SUCCESS. Through the use of technology, best practices in education, and enrichment activities we will engage students and give them a clear sense of purpose, leadership opportunities and set Widely 2018-19 CEP 9  Important Goals (WIGs), we strive to produce well developed individuals by promoting college and career readiness in all grades. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 268, The Emma Lazarus School is a community school located in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn, NY in Community School District 18. It is an elementary school with 350 students from Pre-Kindergarten through grade five. There are 2 full day Pre-Kindergarten classes, 3 Kindergarten classes, 3 First Grade classes, 3 Second, 2 Third, Fourth Grade and Fifth Grade classes. The school population comprises of 94% Black, 4% Hispanic, 2% White and 1% Asian students. Boys account for 47% of the students and girls account for 53%. The average attendance rate for the year 2017-2018 was 91.5%. P. S. 268 is a Title I school that receives Title I funding based on a poverty rate of 85%. As a Algebra For All school, PS 268 participates in the Mayor's initiative focused on preparing students in elementary schools for Algebra. We are partnered with Generation Ready to support instructional practice. Students will ultimately benefit from the increased capacity of the teachers as they prepare students to become college and career ready for the world's possibilities. P. S. 268 celebrates its commitment to collaboration to increase academic achievement and social emotional development students as they move towards success in college and careers. Various teams work together to achieve measureable goals that are embedded in the New York State Common Core Learning Standards and core values of citizenship intricately embracing the Framework for Great Schools. Success of one is linked to the success of the other. Parents and Teachers, Parents and Students, Students and Teachers, Teachers and Teachers, Parents and Administrators, Teachers and Administrators, Students and Administrators along with other consultants, district and central DOE staff collaborate in teams to ensure that students’ needs are met at optimal levels. Combined efforts provide an academic and social emotional experience where students are rigorously engaged in a safe learning environment by experienced teachers and staff who foster high expectations, uses technology, the arts, research based curriculum and instructional strategies to deliver optimal instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body has 8% English Language Learners and 7% special education students exhibiting difficulties in reading and mathematics. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P. S. 268’s key area of focus is Student Engagement which is a major component of Rigorous Instruction. The capacity of teachers to engage student thinking and discussion during teaching and learning. Students engage in collaboration as well as independent thinking that reflect instructional shifts, and produce work that highlight critical thinking and communicative ability. To deepen Rigorous Instruction, teachers and teacher leaders along with school administrators will engage in using established norms and protocols to carefully analyze assessment data and student work in order to effectively plan differentiated learning opportunities that engage student thinking. Specific emphasis is placed on the lowest 1/3 of students which often includes ENLs and SPED as well as black males to ensure that they are attaining measureable growth. 2018-19 CEP 10  2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K268 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 383 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 81.5% % Reduced Lunch 7.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.3% 6.0% 2.3% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.66 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 64% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 51 52 91.3% 4.4% 15.1% 90.9% 0.3% 0.5% 2 4% 7.5 30.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the June 2018 Principal Performance Observation the area of focus for PS 268 is Quality Statement 1.2 Pedagogy was rated Developing. The school incorporates the balanced literacy workshop model through guidance in the instructional handbook and professional development sessions, and teacher coaching to improve instructional pedagogy. Academic intervention is provided by the out of classroom teachers who push in to classrooms as well as an Response to Intervention plan that supports students academic progress during zero period. Students use online programs and are also supported with small group teacher direct instruction.. A close look at how teachers plan revealed some teachers are planning for compliance purposes as opposed to "planning for ownership" of the instructional program. To facilitate the planning process for teachers a standard planning template has been provided as well numerous professional learning sessions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of our instructional staff including ICT and ENL will deepen their understanding of effectively planning for instruction as they deliver instruction. It will be embedded in rigorous engaging units of Literacy and Mathematics integrated with science and social studies. The measurement for this goal is 3% increase overall MOTP ratings teachers. Include showcases incorporating units of studies (students with the assistance of teachers/adults will create their own playwright. Measure growth using lesson exit slips (summative)class/group discussion. Formative: end of unit, performance tasks (beginning, middle, end of year assessments.) Track growth, strength, and challenges. Provide parent workshops for families to be familiarized on top unit related strategies and topics in core classes 2018-19 CEP 13  such as mathematics, ELA and Science. Start and End dates of implementation: Beginning of Year (Performance Tasks) September 24-27, 2018 February 15-28, 2019 Time frame End of unit Formative Assessment: Every 4 to 6 weeks time frame. Progress Monitoring: We will provide dated sign-in sheet (see 5c and b, page 26) 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Plan curriculum maps using essential questions to guide units to student developed ELA, Math, Science work projects. Teacher Teams July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders Weekly District/Central Staff Use established norms and protocols to facilitate Weekly Teacher Team collaborations for looking at student work and planning using data. Teacher Teams July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders Implement the Learning Partners Program where Model Teachers facilitate Classroom lab sites for other teachers to observe and then replicate best practices. Teacher Teams July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders Weekly District/Central Staff Provide various Professional Learning around Danielson Components 1A, 1E, 3B, 3C, and 3D to support staff growth and development during weekly professional learning time, visits to identified showcase schools and other institutions. Teacher Teams July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders, Consultants Bi-Monthly District/Central Staff Weekly District/Central Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Lighthouse Team has three Wildly Impressive Goals (WIGS) to increase parent involvement that includes tracking attendance at scheduled events, volunteering and participating in parent teacher conferences and workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 15  Human Resources - Teacher Teams, Administrators, District Support Staff, Consultants, Teacher Leaders Instructional Resources – Eureka Math, TC Reading and Writing, Passport Social Studies, Fundations, Harcourt Science Schedule Adjustments – Daily Common Preps, Monday and Tuesday weekly Professional Learning Times, Conference Days, Informal Meetings, Intervisitations, Instructional Rounds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Administrators and teachers will engage in collaborative instructional cycles of observation with feedback that delineates specific action steps for improvement and Instructional Rounds to observe implementation. A mid-point benchmark review will be held after two observations cycles to assess progress of toward the specified goal a 3% percentage growth for each teacher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance data will be used to monitor and measure individual teacher growth in Domains 1 and 3. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In the Framework For Great Schools Report 2016 PS 268 strength is a Supportive Environment with a score of 3.06. The findings reported that school leaders effectively communicated high expectations to entire staff, parents, and students. There are systems of support that engender highly motivated and reflective constituents that work together toward achieving school goals. Included in the supportive evidence is the strength of teachers to hold themselves accountable for student learning and turnkey training to share newly acquired knowledge. Collective responsibility for student learning is apparent in how teacher teams work with together to meet students need. Teachers compile Response to Intervention data and regularly monitor progress along with classroom teachers and administrators. The school is strong in compiling data to monitor student progress. In order to actualize student growth, the schools' Priority Need must create a more supportive environment that allows students to take ownership for their own learning, where teachers use the collected data, including work projects to prescribe feedback for students who are in the School and City lowest 1/3. Data will be monitored in Advance using Danielson Domains 2 & 3 which monitors Environment and Instruction. Teachers are rated in how well students are supported in order to feel safe and challenged by their teacher and peers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will provide prescribed actionable feedback within Supportive Environment to our students including SPED and ENLs in order for them to feel safe, supported and challenged by their teacher and peers as measured by increase in Danielson Domain 2 of teacher MOTP. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide various Professional Learning to support staff growth in provide timely, specific, actionable feedback during weekly professional learning time, Weekly Data Meetings, etc. Teachers Students Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Weekly Administrators Teachers Teacher Teams will collaborate to develop rubrics that provide specific language that teachers can use to provide timely, specific, actionable feedback to students. Teachers Sept. 2018 Administrators Students -June 2019 Teachers Weekly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School Staff including all teachers, parent coordinator and administrators will support family engagement with workshops, school-wide activities, trips, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - Model Teachers, Teacher Teams, Administrators, District Support Staff, Consultants Supplemental Instructional Resources – Eureka Math, TC Reading and Writing, Passport Social Studies, Fundations, Harcourt Science Schedule Adjustments – Daily Common Preps, Monday and Tuesday weekly Professional Learning Times, Conference Days, Informal Meetings Google Docs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 18  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In March and June 2019, Teachers MOTP ratings in Danielson Domains 2 and 3 will be monitored for 3% growth on how well students are supported in order to feel safe and challenged by their teacher and peers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from Teachers MOTP ratings in Danielson Domains 2 and 3 will be used to measure growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the School's last Quality Review Report for October 2016 Quality Indicator 4.2 was rated Proficient. The findings reported horizontal and vertical teams engage in professional collaborations using inquiry protocols. Leadership structures focus on strengthening teacher capacity and give rise to their involvement and voice in decision-making. The impact is teacher teams reflect on their practice, provide administrators and each other with meaningful feedback that leverages changes in pedagogy, and improve learning for students. Included in the supportive evidence is the strength of teacher teams engage in protocols to look closely at student and student work products. Each of them contributes their individual perspectives to improve upon the quality of instruction on the grade. For example, an in-depth analysis of writing work samples surfaced trends associated with accomplishing the learning objective, the content writing, and students’ application of writing mechanics. For continuous improvement 100 % of teacher teams will strengthen the implementation of team norms and protocols to maximize the allotted time dedicated to looking at student work and plan differentiated strategies to address specific issues through effective on going professional development in the use of Weekly Data Meetings to review student work and make instructional decisions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the teachers will engage in Weekly Data Meetings to review student work and plan for ELA and Mathematics instruction leading to increased achievement of all students by 3%. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide various Professional Learning to support staff growth in use of established norms and protocols for Weekly Data Meetings. Teacher Teams, July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders Use the Danielson Rubric to support teacher pedagogy with feedback for growth and development following Observations. Teacher Teams, Weekly District/Central Staff July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders Bi-Monthly District/Central Staff Provide opportunities such as workshops, performances, celebrations, that promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement. Teacher Teams, July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 Administrators Teacher Leaders Weekly District/Central Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Lighthouse team consisting of staff members will facilitate opportunities such as workshops, performances, celebrations, that promote teacher-parent collaborations to improve student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - Learning Partners Program Model Teachers, Teacher Teams, Administrators, District Support Staff, Consultants Instructional Resources – Eureka Math, TC Reading and Writing, Passport Social Studies, Fundations, Harcourt Science Schedule Adjustments – Daily Common Preps, Monday and Tuesday weekly Professional Learning Times, Conference Days, Informal Meetings 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Professional Development plan will outline and track the specific identified professional development for individual and groups of teachers. At the beginning of the year, in collaboration with administrators, goals are determined for individual teachers. Between January and February 2019 a mid-point check meeting will be held to assess the progress towards meeting the identified goals of 3% increase using MOTP ratings in Advance. End of year conferences will provide an opportunity to reflect on goals met or not yet attained. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP progress in advance will used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the School's last Quality Review Report for October 2016 it was evidenced that there were inconsistencies across the grades in the instructional staff having clear expectations for using data to plan instructional outcomes. The Priority Need for Effective School Leadership a administrative focus by the Principal and Assistant Principal to strengthen teacher's use of data to plan for instruction. The focus will be on the planning using data (Danielson Domain 1) for rigorous and engaging instruction (Danielson Doamin 3) that maximizes student engagement with meaningful task. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95 % teachers will plan for and deliver rigorous, engaging instruction that provide students numerous opportunities to have relevant discussions that increases their critical thinking and is evidenced in increased MOTP results in Danielson components 1A, 1E, 3B, 3C and 3D. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Teams will collaborate to plan and develop grade specific discussion prompts for classroom use. Administrators Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Coaches Teachers Weekly Teacher Leaders TDEC School Leaders will use the Danielson rubric to rate components 1 and 3 as well as provide feedback and actionable next steps. Administrators Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Coaches, Teachers Weekly Teacher Leaders TDEC District Staff will support School Leaders to ensure consistency in the interpretation of the Danielson rubric. Administrators Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Coaches Teachers 2x year Teacher Leaders TDEC School Leaders will use videos to establish a shared belief system of effective and highly effective classroom practices for the Danielson rubric. Administrators Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Coaches Teachers Weeky Teacher Leaders TDEC 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Lighthouse Team is a student group who develops school-wide activities and student celebrations to highlight observed student leadership. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - Learning Partners Program Model Teachers, Teacher Teams, Administrators, District Support Staff, Consultants Instructional Resources – Eureka Math, TC Reading and Writing, Passport Social Studies, Fundations, Harcourt Science Schedule Adjustments – Daily Common Preps, Monday and Tuesday weekly Professional Learning Times, Conference Days, Informal Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, administrators will monitor MOTP progress as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement for teachers. Administrators will assess school progress toward meeting the specified goal after two observations are completed for all teachers in January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP data for Danielson Domain 1 and 3. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYC School Survey 2017-2018 Report P. S. 268 has positive response for Strong Family-Community Ties. In order to engage more families the school will increase communication in all applicable languages. The Priority need that will be addressed is to increase family engagement in all schoolwide activities as indicated a decrease in the 2017-18 NYC Survey participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, family engagement in all schoolwide activities will increase by 3% as measured by the 2018-19 NYC Survey participation rate. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase the number opportunities to engage families with regular school events including parent workshops, classes, and outreach and connection to resources that are available in the community. Parents Sept. 2018 Administrators Students - June 2019 Staff Host specialized events that target specific groups of parents, including specifically for male caregivers. Parents Sept. 2018 Administrators Weekly Teachers Parent Leaders District Team Students - June 2019 Staff Monthly Teachers Parent Leaders District Team Host parent and child workshops. Parents Sept. 2018 Administrators Students - June 2019 Staff Weekly Teachers Parent Leaders District Team Host workshops and other events at varying times that fit in the schedule of families. Parents Sept. 2018 Administrators Students - June 2019 Staff Monthly Teachers Parent Leaders District Team 2018-19 CEP 27  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Lighthouse Team is a teacher/student group who develops school-wide activities and student celebrations to highlight observed student leadership will organize school-wide activities throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session funding may be used to have teachers provide workshops for families to better understand the CCLS demands on students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, there will be a 3% increase in attendance at parent workshops and school wide activities as evidenced by attendance records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance logs will be used to assess progress forward. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring below the following scale scores. Grade 3 - 299 Grade 4 - 296 Grade 5 - 297 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction, One-to-one teacher conferencing Before, During and After school day, Saturday school and Holiday session. Academic Intervention Enrichment Onlineprograms Mathematics Teacher recommendations Students scoring below the following scale scores. Grade 3 - 293 Grade 4 - 284 Grade 5 - 289 Academic Intervention Enrichment Onlineprograms Teacher recommendations Small group instruction, One-to-one teacher conferencing Before, During and After school day, Saturday school and Holiday session. Science Based on ELA NYS Science Results Academic Intervention Teacher recommendations Enrichment Small group instruction, One-to-one teacher conferencing Before, During and After school day, Saturday school and Holiday session. Onlineprograms 2018-19 CEP 29  Social Studies Based on ELAResults Students scoring below the following scale scores. Grade 3 - 299 Grade 4 - 296 Grade 5 - 297 Teacher recommendations At Risk counseling services. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Academic Intervention Enrichment Small group instruction, One-to-one teacher conferencing Before, During and After school day, Saturday school and Holiday session. Counseling Small group One-to-One Before, During and After school day, Saturday school and Holiday session. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 39 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We support our students in temporary housing with school supplies including but not limited to uniforms, instructional supplies, trips, etc. In addition to our In School Food Pantry funded through collaboration with FoodBank of NYC provides meal gap support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit, retain, assign and support high quality professionals, administrators employ a collaborative approach to hiring, supporting and developing highly qualified candidates to join the school team. Teachers set individual, team and school-wide professional goals that provide opportunities for them to engage in their own growth and development. Teachers actively engage in providing turnkey professional development to their colleagues which increase their leadership capacity. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is the cornerstone of school improvement at P. S. 268. Teachers, school administrators, paraprofessionals, other staff members, as well as District, Borough Field Support Center, and Central staff participates in ongoing Professional Development to promote student achievement towards meeting the Common Core State Standards. Topics include unpacking CCSS in ELA and Mathematics, Effective Unit and lesson planning, analysis of data to promote student success and specific pedagogical practices that enhance instruction. Professional development occurs in weekly, monthly and other identified times. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 33  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). P. S. 268's Transition Plan for assisting Preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program includes an aligned CCSS curricula, vertical collaboration between preschool and early grade teachers, creating a culture that promotes a welcoming environment for families, ongoing professional development to support teacher pedagogy, opportunities for parent engagement including access to staff, welcome to Kindergarten receptions and a culminating preschool graduation ceremony. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Classroom teachers meet in grade level and teacher teams weekly to review student assessment data. They analyze student performance and progress using formative and summative assessment to inform their instructional plans. Teams such as MOSL, SLT, SIT, Grade Leaders, etc. participate in decision making to use and the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) 13, 15, 18, 20, 22 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 300,714.00 2018-19 CEP 34  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 122,741.00 0 0 2,126,528.00 X X 13, 15, 18, 20, 22 13, 15, 18, 20, 22 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 35  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 268, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Public School 268 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 38  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 268 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 39  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 41  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name PS 268 The Emma Lazarus School Borough Brooklyn School Number 268 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sylvia Fairclough-Leslie Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher 0 Teacher/Subject Area Jackie Montalvo/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Haynes/Math Related-Service Provider Francesca Lormeus/Speech Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Rick Romain Coach N/A School Counselor Angela Newton Parent Pierre Jean Louis Parent Coordinator Imogene Thomas Field Support Center Staff Member Mauricia de Govia Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 44  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 348 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 268 we use DRA, Fountas and Pinnell running record is used to determine reading levels. This data is used to plan for the implementation of Common Core Aligned Literacy curriculum. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data is also used to assess the early literary skills of our ELLs. Literacy observation is a dynamic process, not static and plans are revised as a student gains proficiency. Assessment data is analyzed to target our instruction on areas for improvement. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 45  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review and assess the quality of our ENL program by the percentage of students have gained proficiency, and those others who made progress in moving up in their composit NYSESLAT rating. e.g. moving from a B to an I. We also look and exam our students’ ELA , math scores and science scores on the standardized tests. We also measure how well our program is doing anecdotes: Seeing how our once ELLs are now faring in the non-Enl world. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Within the RtI framework data is used assess how students are moving towards academic goals. This data will determine which area requires additional services for improvement and\or extension. Modifications are frequently made by the School Implementation Team when necessary in order to meet the student need. Our RtI implementation process begins with the need, which can come from a teacher or a parent. The teacher completes the necessary documents that provides the details of the specific student issue, strategies that the teacher/parent have implemented thus far, the level of success or lack thereof. The SIT provides feedback and suggestion to the teacher for implementation. A time line is created for follow-up before next steps. the team monitors the student progress at monthly meetings which are held on every first Friday of each month of the school year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across time and grade is explicit. In the early years, speaking and listening skills, need to be nurtured and developed. By the 3rd, 4th and 5th grades, teaching is mainly devoted to enhancing the reading and writing modalities,excepting for newly arrived English language learners. In the early grades, children are mainly at the beginning proficiency levels, while in the upper grades the advanced proficiency level is usually reached. There are exceptions to every rule, and the ENL teacher adjusts his targeted instruction to focus on the deficiencies, if they exist. Data patterns determine teaching. Teaching is data driven.This year,P.S.268 faces a new challenge:approximately 20% of our ENLs are new English language learners, with minimal English language skills, and these students are spread across all grade levels. The teaching approach is such that listening and speaking skills must be mastered first, and then their reading and writing skills will develop, as their cohorts’ skills have shown to have developed over time and grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1)P.S.268 utilizes only the ENL method of instruction in teaching its children to gain proficiency in English. a) At P.S.268 we employ both the push-in and pull-out methods of instruction. b) At the employ heterogeneous groupings. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 46  NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each child’s proficiency level is checked by the ESL teacher and by the supervisory staff, according to his or her NYSESLAT score, or his or her NYSITELL score, and the instructional minutes are thus derived. The beginning and intermediate level students are thus instructed 360 minutes per week , and the students at the advanced level are given 180 minute of ENL instruction per week. Instruction is delivered only by a certified ENL teacher- who employs ENL methodology in the instruction of his students. Students receive daily instruction in ELA for a minimum of 90 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 268 employs an ENL model. As such English is used as the language of instruction. Content areas are made comprehensible to the ENL students at P.S.268 by explaining and defining, in the most simple terms, the key words essential for the student to be able to comprehend the content area. The words may be labeled and defined in an English, thus enabling the student to proceed in the learning process, unimpeded by the lack of understanding of the key words necessary to understand the content area. Where applicable and when possible, the word is defined in the student’s native language. The same way as words are defined, where applicable and feasible, pictures displaying the key content words’ meaning are displayed. Technology is an ever present and growing component of making English comprehensible to our ENLs. Google Translates both in its audio form and in its scripted forms. Expeditionary Learning is the NYS common core aligned literacy based program used to implement the learning standards on grades 3-5. This program includes close readings of rich text that is both fiction and non fiction. Kindergarten through grade 2 uses Core Knowledge Language Arts program to implement the learning standards. This powerful uses read alouds with explicit teaching of skills and strategies teach reading. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At P.S.268 we make sure the child is properly evaluated in his home language by firstly administering the LAB-R in Spanish, if appropriate and needed. We have a large and talented staff. If a child is new, or is showing signs of stagnating learning, a staff member fluent in the child’s home language will be asked to assist in whatever aspect of informal assessment is needed. A meeting with the child’s parent will be called for, and an assessment of the child’s academic and or social behavior, in his native country, and at present, at his Brooklyn location, will be asked for. We try to ascertain if the social dynamics of the family is mitigating the child’s rate of language acquisition. We will give the child a book in his native language , where possible, and ask him to read for us. We will ask him to do age appropriate math. If needed ,we will contact the e school psychologist, in order to obtain a professional who could help us assess the child in his native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At P.S.268 we not only differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups but we try to differentiate instruction for each child or small groups of students. End goals are different for certain subgroups, and different levels of performance are expected from different children. Scaffolding techniques are utilized to allow different children to attain the desired goals, a) SIFE children are given extra instruction in English language learning. The children are exposed to the most primary of skills. Listening to, and hearing the English language, and speaking the English language is of the utmost importance. Listening to the language with visuals-computer based programs (i-ready), discs with books (Options-Two Voices),audio discs with the 2018-19 CEP 47  alphabet, numbers , days of the week etc, with coordinating literature, picture dictionaries, plus instruction at a lower grade level than age appropriate, will help the child to make up his or her SIFE gap. Extra minutes of ESL instruction- immersion- are of utmost importance. At present we have no SIFE children in our school. b) ELLs that are in the U.S. for less the 3 years are not a homogeneous group., For ELLs that are beginning English language learners, the basics of the English language must be taught to them. Immersion in listening and in speaking, the recognition of the alphabet and numbers are a must. The chance to speak the language, to formulate sentences, to think in English must be given to our new ELLs in a safe, ridicule free environment. The ELLs who are here for less than three years that have mastered the listening and speaking skills are given the tools and tasks to master the reading and writing skills. At P.S.268 the reading and writing skills are taught simultaneously. When we learn a new word, or learn to decode a new word, we speak it, them we write it in sentences- for grade 2 and above and sometimes in grade 1.For students in grade 2, and in grade 1, we teach the children to comprehend text. We teach our new ENLS ( 3 years or less) to go back in a story and identify where the answer can be found, by noting paragraph and sentence, by looking at the title, at the picture, by reading questions first etc. We prepare our ENLs to take the standardized tests by presenting them with multiple practice tests given under standardized testing conditions. The ENL teacher and the homeroom teachers present the students with strategies and skills thus enabling them to master the standardized tests.Subject to funding, ENL students at P.S.268 are offered the same after school and week-end preparatory courses that our non-ELLS are offered Preparation for the standardized tests is a school team function at P.S.268, not a only an ENL function. We are thus continually preparing the children for the standardized tests at P.S.268 c) Fo ELLs in their 4th to 6th years we use a very targeted approach, If the students have a deficiency in comprehension, work is assigned- homework- in this targeted area. Conferences with school the Literacy person occur, offering new and different strategies that might benefit the child. If the limiting factor is writing- as indicted by the NYSESLAT and by teacher observations, assignments will be given in order that the student may gain proficiency. Keeping contact with the child’s parent is of utmost importance. After school programs- tutorials- subject to funding are offered to the 4th to 6th year ENLs. It is stressed that they take advantage of these resources. Assessing.targeting, and motivating are the areas needed to be stressed in order to move 4th to 6th year ENLS. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There are no ENL-SWDs at P.S.268, however the school focus is vocabulary development to produce stronger writing. Through teacher professional development such as the rigorous implementation of Teacher Effectiveness teachers provide access to academic content that is aligned to the standards using common core aligned support materials that accelerate English Language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? There are no ENL-SWDs currently enrolled in our school. Should the school enroll students that belong to the subgroup of ENL-SWDs in the future flexible programming would be utilized to educate students in the least restrictive environments based on student strength while diligently increasing opportunities to improve areas for improvement. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Interventions in ELA, math, and science are offered to all students who are in need of such services at PS 268. Additional effort is placed on ensuring that ENLs and SWD are provided with opportunities to participate in these programs. Translation an interpretation services are used to inform and or explain program benefits to parents of ELLs and they are encouraged to participate. The programs are held on weekends, and after school, and are subject to funding. Intervention programs are opened to children grades 2-5. The programs are given in English only as a supplement of our ESL program. Students showed increased proficiency on the Spring 2013 NYS exams on the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math,and Science exams. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2018-19 CEP 48  Two new reading programs were initiated during 2013-14, Expeditionary Learning on Grades 3-5 and Core Knowledge Langauge Arts in Kindergarten through grade 2. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? ECLAS 2 assessment was discontinued by New York City and replaced with Fountas and Pinnell Running Records. This reading assessment determines the reading level of a student, their accuracy and comprehension rate. It is used to provide instruction that is accessible to individual students and offers teachers the ability to quickly assess students and address areas for improvement several times throughout the school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given equal access to all programs. Letters are translated into the native languages, along with letters in English, describing the activities and programs offered. Each ENL child is asked to sign for his/her letter of notification. The importance of the programs is explained by the ELL teacher, the official class teacher, and announcements are made over the public address system. After school and other supplemental services are provided based on need. ELA , Math, Science and NYSESLAT supplemental programs are offered after school two days per week from November to March or May, subject to funding availability. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Listed below is a list of materials that are used at PS 268, in order to promote English language proficiency in our ELLs. Scaffolding, is most important at our lower proficiency levels, and lower grade levels.Scaffolding is adjusted to reflect the learning gains of the student. Computer programs may be used at the beginning level, but much teacher guidance and support must be given. As the student progresses, by grade level and proficiency level, more independent work, computer and non-computer work may be assumed by the English language learner. Kindergarten: Hand-held alphabet charts, manipulatives (letters, numbers) puzzles (letters, numbers) an ENL cd with school generated alphabet recognition charts, letter sounds, numbers, days of the week, months, and Dolch words, Starfall (Computer based) Mighty Books( Computer based), Big Books, Crayola on line Grade 1 Harcourt- Brace Phonics workbook ENL cd with school generated alphabet recognition charts, letter sounds, numbers , days of the week, months, and Dolch words, Leap Frog , Starfall (Computer based), Mighty Books (Computer based )Carousel Readers – Dominie Press and writing component Sunshine Fiction – The Wright Group and writing component Two Voices A Read Along Series- Options Publishing Letter/Sound Chart , Storytown - Harcourt Brace Big Book of Rhymes and Poems- Harcourt Brace Grade 2/3 Harcourt- Brace Phonics workbook, ENL cd with school generated booklet with Dolch words, letter sounds, numbers, and multiplication facts. Continental Press reading comprehension workbooks. Jamestown Heritage Readers Book A- Jamestown Publishers and writing component. Easy True Stories, Two Voices A Read Along Series- Options Publishing Big Book of Rhymes and Poems Crayola on line, Leap Frog , Starfall(Computer based), Mighty Books Computer based) Tumblebooks(computer based.My Skills Tutor(Computer based) Grade 3/4/5 Jamestown Heritage Readers Books B and C- Jamestown Publishers and writing component. Continental press Reading Skills. Best Practices in Reading- Level c- Options Publishing and writing component Goodman’s Five Star Activity Books Jamestown Publishers and writing component Folk Heroes Level C- Continental Press and writing component Children Around the World- Continental Press and Writing Component My Skills Tutor( Computer Based), Starfall( computer based) Tumblebooks(computer based) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 49  Native language support is employed by the use of native language dictionaries, native language books,with the peer tutoring given by more advanced English language students, speaking in the native language, and by the acumen, and knowledge and skill of the ESL teacher, 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required support services, and resources correspond to the ELLS ages and grade levels. When a new child comes in,in the early grades, the fear of a new school, and the actuality of not knowing the language,sets the school team in motion. The guidance counselor, the assistant principal, even the school safety officer, and the ENL teacher, all try to make the transition for the newcomer easier and less frightening. As the ENL approaches graduation, we offer special guidance in how to select the correct junior high for the ENL. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Listed below is a list of materials that are used at PS 268, in order to promote English language proficiency in our ELLs. Scaffolding, is most important at our lower proficiency levels, and lower grade levels.Scaffolding is adjusted to reflect the learning gains of the student. Computer programs may be used at the beginning level, but much teacher guidance and support must be given. As the student progresses, by grade level and proficiency level, more independent work, computer and non-computer work may be assumed by the English language learner. Kindergarten: Hand-held alphabet charts, manipulatives (letters, numbers) puzzles (letters, numbers) an ENL cd with school generated alphabet recognition charts, letter sounds, numbers, days of the week, months, and Dolch words, Starfall (Computer based) Mighty Books( Computer based), Big Books, Crayola on line Grade 1 Harcourt- Brace Phonics workbook ENL cd with school generated alphabet recognition charts, letter sounds, numbers , days of the week, months, and Dolch words, Leap Frog , Starfall (Computer based), Mighty Books (Computer based )Carousel Readers – Dominie Press and writing component Sunshine Fiction – The Wright Group and writing component Two Voices A Read Along Series- Options Publishing Letter/Sound Chart , Storytown - Harcourt Brace Big Book of Rhymes and Poems- Harcourt Brace Grade 2/3 Harcourt- Brace Phonics workbook, ENL cd with school generated booklet with Dolch words, letter sounds, numbers, and multiplication facts. Continental Press reading comprehension workbooks. Jamestown Heritage Readers Book A- Jamestown Publishers and writing component. Easy True Stories, Two Voices A Read Along Series- Options Publishing Big Book of Rhymes and Poems Crayola on line, Leap Frog , Starfall(Computer based), Mighty Books Computer based) Tumblebooks(computer based.My Skills Tutor(Computer based) Grade 3/4/5 Jamestown Heritage Readers Books B and C- Jamestown Publishers and writing component. Continental press Reading Skills. Best Practices in Reading- Level c- Options Publishing and writing component Goodman’s Five Star Activity Books Jamestown Publishers and writing component Folk Heroes Level C- Continental Press and writing component Children Around the World- Continental Press and Writing Component My Skills Tutor( Computer Based), Starfall( computer based) Tumblebooks(computer based) 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Once enrolled families are invited to participate in all school activities beginning with Parent Orientation at the beginning of the school. Parents meet the teachers who share expectations for the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NA 2018-19 CEP 50  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development The schools Professional Development Plan includes the ENL teacher's participation in all Literacy, Mathematics and Science in house sessions provided for the classroom teachers. Additionally the ENL teacher and teachers with ENL students in their classes receive professional development from the administration and the Network staff in specific topics such as vocabulary development for ENL. Citywide Professional Development opportunities are also used to supplement the schools Professional development plan. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. During our middle school transition year, staff including teachers, guidance counsellors, administration and the parent coordinator work closely with the ENL parents to provide support in Middle School Choice and programs availability. This process begins in the fall of the students fifth grade year. There are additional parent forums during the students fourth grade year to prepare for the fifth grade year events. The ENL teacher will attend a minimum of 7.5 hours of ENL development at ENL conferences. The conferences are held throughout the city. The administration in consultation with the Network staff and the ESL teacher choose which conference will help the ENL teacher gain proficiency and insight to the teaching of ENLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent engagement begins upon the first entry into our school. The main entrance has translated posters that provides information to parents. Translated invitations are sent home to parents for all school activities as well as activities specifically designed for ENLs, such as the initial program choice meeting. There are monthly Book of the Month workshops, Guidance meetings as needed, Parent orientation Night in September, NYS Testing Report Meeting in October to review testing data and set academic goals, Annual Title I Parent meeting, Parent Teacher Conferences, Promotional Meetings in January/February and in June. Culminating activities in June for Kindergarten and Grade Five students caps off the years activities. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 51  School generated Parent surveys and the annual school survey (Spring) are used to determine parent need. Teachers also do interest survey of their specific students and parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 52 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sylvia Fairclough-Leslie, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: ps 268 School DBN: 18k268 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Sylvia Fairclough-Leslie Principal Rick Romain Assistant Principal Imogene Thomas Parent Coordinator Hugeline Louis ENL/Bilingual Teacher Pierre Jean Louis Parent Jackie Montalvo/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Sharon Haynes/Math Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Angela Newton School Counselor Beverly Wilkins Mauricierre de Govia Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Director Other Other Other 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K268 School Name: Emma Lazarus School Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Hugeline Louis ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The first data and methodology used to assess our written and oral translation and interpretation needs is the Home Language Identification survey (HLIS) which is completed during admission intake. Additional needs based information is gathered based on attendance at Parent meetings that occur throughout the school year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English English 50 English 50 2018-19 CEP 55  Spanish Spanish Haitian Creole Haitian Creole Arabic Arabic 10 10 20 English Haitian Creole Arabic 10 10 20 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Creole, Spanish, Arabic Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Notices, newsletters, invitations, calendars, reminders, program applications Notices, newsletters, invitations, calendars, reminders, program applications Notices, newsletters, invitations, calendars, reminders, program applications Notices, newsletters, invitations, calendars, reminders, program applications Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly DOE DOE DOE DOE 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent meetings, parent teacher conference curriculum workshops, guidance meetings Parent meetings, parent teacher conference curriculum workshops, guidance meetings September interpretation service(s)? Interpretation Unit November Interpretation Unit 2018-19 CEP 56  Parent meetings, parent teacher conference curriculum workshops, guidance meetings March Interpretation Unit Parent meetings, parent teacher conference curriculum workshops, guidance meetings May Interpretation Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The will make every effort to ensure that communication flows easily with families who cannot communicate in english. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff Handbook Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All notices are translated and sent home according to the dominant language of the parent/guardian. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are used to provide an opportunity to parent to share their feedback to school staff regarding the quality of service. Conversations with families will elicit feedback regarding needs. 2018-19 CEP 57 
