2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K282 School Name: P.S. 282 PARK SLOPE Principal: RASHAN HOKE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Park Slope School 13K282 331300010282 Pre-K to 8 School Number (DBN): 180 6 th Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11217 718-622-1626 718-622-3471 Phone Number: Fax: Crystal Brissett cpadmorebrissett@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Rashan Hoke Kyle Plant Stephanie Kearns /Una La Marche Una La Marche N/A N/A G. West District Information ZinaCooper Superintendent: 335 Park Place, Rm 116, Brooklyn, NY 11238 BFreeman6@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-636-3284 Phone Number: (718) 636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Room 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-225-5119 B.B. 718-935-4314 Fax 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rashan Hoke Kyle Plant Una LaMarche Georgina West Heather Roberts Rosina Appicella Tonia Edwards *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lorraine Williams Jennifer Baron ShanikkaChase David Harding Stephanie Kearns Tina Gupta Steve Hamill Teacher Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Park Slope 282, our mission is to engage students, staff, parents and the community in providing rich, project-based learning experiences while supporting our students' social-emotional development. We believe this will be done by fostering meaningful relationships within our school community and establishing high expectations for all to ensure that our students dream, believe, excel and achieve. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Park Slope School 282 is a PreK to 8 school with approximately 850 students. It is our goal to support a school that functions as a unified Pre-K to 8 school that serves the community with quality, experiential education for our students. We know that our relationships with our staff and parents are key levers to student achievement. We look to support parent involvement and create an environment where teachers feel empowered through mechanisms of shared leadership. According to our past Quality Review, PS/MS 282 scored proficient in the area of “Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved students learning.” A critical lever to this improvement is the development and support of teacher team inquiry work over the past year. As we move forward, we are looking to increase the support and achievement of students with disabilities and our gifted and talented population. We believe that engaging all students is a primary focus for our teachers and is embedded in our instructional focus. We are currently implementing the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project, K to 8, to engage our students in meaningful literacy experiences that will support them as lifelong readers and writers. We are employing a unified math curriculum Go Math, K to 8, and supplementing it with Exemplars curriculum training and learning activities. Park Slope 282 has also engaged in the Algebra 4 All cohort 2016-2017 and is working with the Math In Focus trainers to promote critical thinking, productive struggle and pre-algebra concepts. Achieving High Standards for All Children Cultivating a school community that collectively organizes its efforts so that every child is achieving high standards our primary mission at Park Slope 282. Our school community must teach every child to dream, believe, excel and achieve. We continuously work to improve outcomes for all students regardless of their race, gender, ethnicity, disability, religion or economic status. Developing The Whole Child Supporting the cognitive, emotional and physical intelligences of young children helps to put the pieces together on how to close the achievement and opportunity gap of our children. We achieve this coming together as a team, using our combined set of skills and resources to maximize the potential of all of our students. This requires: ● Understanding and nurturing the social, emotional, physical, and cognitive needs of every child. ● Knowing and celebrating the creativity and interests that students bring to school. ● Engaging students to showcase their diverse gifts and talents. ● Cultivating resilience in students to help them persevere in their daily learning experiences. Partnering with Families and Our School Community There must be an active partnership between students, parents, community, and staff. The engagement of our families happens every day by integrating the culture, resources, and members of our school community. This partnership is supported by fostering relationships built on mutual trust and respect for all of our roles. Developing Systems For Student Success 2018-19 CEP 10  The task of supporting student achievement is made more manageable for teachers and other team members when we do the work together and pool our varied skill sets and resources. Teacher teams will support student learning with the goal of working collaboratively to reflect on and refine teaching practices that: ● Remain anchored in common standards that are both rigorous and developmentally appropriate. ● Teach students how to reason, to think critically, be creative, and to work with others. ● Engage students in inquiry-based work that meets the needs of all learners including students with IEP’s and our lowest third. Teachers and school leaders must consistently work together and use formative and summative data to build on student’s strengths and close instructional gaps. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We will focus our target interventions for students with IEP's in self contained and ICT, ELL's and lowest third population as assessed by the NYS ELA and Math assessments and the TC Running Records 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our instructional focus is: Students will engage in high quality discussions exemplified by responding to and extending each other’s thinking, and crafting questions to help each other deepen and elaborate upon their thinking. Through the use of routine checks for understanding that are embedded in instruction, teachers will increase cognitive challenge and create specially designed instruction for all students. What this looks like in the classroom is:  Show evidence of understanding/Making understanding visible (i.e. Answering Questions on Dry-Erase Boards, Jotting Down Top Three, Students present on how they arrive at conclusions, Quick Writes)  Use Conversation Protocols, Create their own Discussion Starters, Work in groups with others in clearly defined roles, Work in Purposeful Groups, Setting Individual Goals, Using Rubrics to Self-Evaluate  Use conversation and activities to extend student understanding  Engage in specially designed instruction and assessments to meet their individual needs in small groups  Engage in independent reading, writing, and problem solving activities in small groups 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K282 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 742 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 38 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 34 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 54.0% % Attendance Rate 51.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 25.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 2% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 57.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 56 57 90.9% 1.8% 17.9% 52.7% 3.6% 1.9% 6 20% 5.4 39.6% 14% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. There are pockets of rigorous instruction in PS/MS 282. While some classrooms engage students in high-level questioning and discussion, this isn’t consistent throughout the school. As such, we are progressing in this area. With the implementation of the workshop model (a model in which students learn by doing), teachers are increasingly engaging students in discussions and are beginning to use accountable talk (quality student discussions). This work must be strengthened to ensure higher levels of student achievement. Strengths ● On the 2016 – 2017 Quality Review, some classrooms utilized Depth of Knowledge and Bloom’s Taxonomy to create higher level questions and engage students in rich discussions. ● According to the 2017 – 2018 NYC School Survey Report, 60% of teachers believe that school leaders “place a high priority on the quality of teaching,” while 90% of parents were satisfied with the education their child received. ● In 2017, 65% of our ELL population made significant progress in the State Tests. Also, our third graders had the highest proficiency rates for the school in both ELA and Math. Weaknesses ● As of May 2018, only 50% of teachers were rated effective or highly effective in Danielson 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques. ● According to the 2017 – 2018 NYC School Survey Report, overall satisfaction of the instructional core was at 79%, below the city average. Teacher satisfaction with the instructional core was at 62%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 13  By June 2019 school leaders and teachers will employ techniques to promote student engagement, enthusiasm, and discussion as evidenced by an overall increase of 10 points in effective and highly effective ratings in Danielson components 3b, 3c, and 3d. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Math in Focus training delivered via 6 visits across K-5 [addresses goals 5A4] September 2017 - June 2019 Teacher leaders and Principal K-5 teachers and teacher leaders with an emphasis on moving special populations like SPED and ESL School leaders will identify teachers who have effective and highly effective ratings in Danielson components 1e, 3b, 3c, as well as 3d and orchestrate a minimum of 5 interclass visitations outside of TC visits. [addresses goals 5A1 and 5A2] All teachers and Paraprofessionals educators September 2017 - June 2019 Assistant Principals School leaders will identify teachers who have effective and highly effective ratings in Danielson components 3b and orchestrate inter-class visitations. All teachers Hold Professional Development support in TC training with a minimum of 9 visits/year. [addresses goal 5A3] All teachers and Paraprofessionals with an emphasis on moving special populations like SPED and ESL Assistant Principals Assistant Principals September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We send out FYI weekly explaining what is going on at 282. Curriculum Night/ Meet the teacher is held in the beginning of the school year in September to inform parents about the curriculum programs, grading policy and expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 15  We will utilize grade leaders and other teacher leaders within the school. We will also utilize the NYCDOE Common Core Library which provides professional development resources for teacher teams. Monday Professional Development will be the primary time this work is done. However, we will also make use of common planning time built into the schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. According to the most recent (June 2018) Measures of Teacher Practice, 50% of teachers were rated effective and/or highly effective in questioning and discussion techniques (3B). By January 2019, 55% of teachers will be rated effective/highly effective and by June 2019, 60% of teachers will be rated effective/highly effective Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We use Teachers College On Demand Writing pieces and Teachers college Running Record for ELA Grades K-5. Item Analysis Check -Ins for performance Tasks grades 3-8. We also have Mock ELA state exams for grades 3-8. For Math we have a Mock state exam, Go Math Baseline and Go Math Benchmark exam for grades 3-8. Math and focus Baseline and Math and Focus benchmark exam for grades K-2. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: ● Based on the 2015 Preliminary Ratings for the 2015 Quality Review, PS/MS282 is rated proficient in school culture. As stated in the report: The school successfully establishes a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for staff, students, and families, and provides support to achieve those expectations. ● The NYC School Survey 2018 indicated that the school’s annual average attendance rate is at 92.7% exceeding the target set by the city. Needs: ● The Learning Environment Survey suggests that improvement is needed in fostering trust and respect between students and teachers. Only 63% of students felt that most students treat adults with respect, while 66% felt that they were safe in school. ● 31% of incidents that occur at PS/MS 282 happen within classrooms as indicated in the 2015-2016 Incident Location Summary Report. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 provide all Pre-K through 2nd grade teachers with Sanford Harmony training. By June 2019 teachers will be more supported/assisted with behavioral/emotional escalations as indicated by NYC School Quality measure Q20h rising from 67% positive to 80%. By June 2019 the Brave Trainings program will be started. By June 2019 the percentage of students with 90% + attendance will increase from 66% to 90% By June 2019 student support structures will be applied in accordance with the school wide ladder of referral protocol By June 2019 the number of classroom incidents for the school year will be reduced 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Schedule and deliver Sanford Harmony training [addresses goals 5B1, 5B2 and 5B6] School leaders will identify teachers who have effective and highly effective ratings in Danielson components 2a and 2d and orchestrate interclass visitations. [addresses goals 5B1, 5B5, and 5B6] Schedule and hold the first Brave Trainings sessions with staff. [addresses goal 5B3] All teachers School leaders and staff will provide a parent town hall to support students with diversity and inclusion, hosted by Brave Trainings. Pre-K through 2nd grade parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre-K through 2nd grade teachers and teacher leaders All teachers September 2017 - June 2019 Teacher leaders and Principal Assistant Principals and teacher leaders Principal and School Counselor Assistant Principals September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Supportive Staff member, Ms. Clay, Ms. Meritt, Ms. Brissett and Ms. Roberts makes calls home to kids with lateness and excessive absences to stress the importance of getting to school on time in order to receive the instruction they need to succeed 2 to 3 times a week. Mr. Peter. W the attendance teacher does home visits when necessary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The school leadership will conduct an assembly and town hall sessions for reinforcement of the program. ● The assistant principals will facilitate parent meetings. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, the school will evaluate the progress of the programs by generating a preliminary survey to ascertain the current climate in regards to the schools’ safe and respectful environment. Adjustments to the plan will be made based on these assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We use Teachers College On Demand Writing pieces and Teachers college Running Record for ELA Grades K-5. Item Analysis Check -Ins for performance Tasks grades 3-8. We also have Mock ELA state exams for grades 3-8. For Math we have a Mock state exam, Go Math Baseline and Go Math Benchmark exam for grades 3-8. Math and focus Baseline and Math and Focus benchmark exam for grades K-2. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2018-19 CEP 20  Strengths We know that on our last QR, Park Slope 282 scored a Proficient rating in how the school supports and evaluates teachers through the Danielson Framework and how they go about analyzing the learning outcomes of their students. This entails teacher growth supported by: 1. effective feedback and next steps from observations and data, 2. feedback to teachers supports development and offers trends and next steps using the Danielson Framework and 3. data informed professional development and teacher/administrator performance based decisions. We also know that according to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey 91% of our teachers felt positive about the initiatives and work being done around cultural awareness and supporting inclusive classroom instruction. Weaknesses The 2017-2018 NYC School Survey section on Collaborative Teachers has dropped from 74% positive to 63% positive responses from teachers. The specific sub-categories we will focus on to improve this area are: 1. 45% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms. 2. 55% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will implement regular vertically and horizontally aligned classroom intra-visitations as part of the teacher team inquiry cycle to make recommendations about the effectiveness of teaching and learning as well as the effectiveness of instructional supports. The school will also provide opportunities for related service providers to meet with classroom teachers to discuss IEP goals and targeted small group instruction. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will implement regular vertically and horizontally aligned classroom intra-visitations as part of the teacher team inquiry cycle to make. The school will provide opportunities for related service providers to meet with classroom teachers to discuss IEP goals and targeted small group instruction Grades K-8 The school will provide opportunities for related service providers to meet with classroom teachers to discuss IEP goals and targeted small group instruction Grades K-8 Structured Professional Development in common planning and Integrated Co-teaching (ICT) models and strategies. Common planning PD will focus on supporting teachers when planning for rigorous instruction in teams. ICT PD will support ICT teams and how they work together to deliver instruction. Grades K-8 September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Principal Assistant Principals. teacher leaders Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals and Guidance Counselors have workshops throughout the school year to promote parent activity in the school and to keep parents in the know on how to support their child at home. Parent Teacher conferences are held twice a year to meet with parents to address issues, concerns and progress of students.. We also have Movie night one Friday a month, Fitness Friday, TGIFF, etc. PTO has fundraisers to help support music and arts programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principals will adjust staff schedules when necessary to accommodate inter-class and inter-school visits. Differentiated Professional Development will be provided for teachers in staff. Assistant Principals will schedule and monitor teacher progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, 2019, administration will assess the school’s progress towards meeting this goal by analyzing student growth in all subject areas. Administration will monitor and review student data acquired from teacher team meetings, formal and informal observations reports and by monitoring teacher progress and growth after attending inter-school and inter-class visitations. Adjustments to the action plan will be made if applicable. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We use Teachers College On Demand Writing pieces and Teachers college Running Record for ELA Grades K-5. Item Analysis Check -Ins for performance Tasks grades 3-8. We also have Mock ELA state exams for grades 3-8. For Math we have a Mock state exam, Go Math Baseline and Go Math Benchmark exam for grades 3-8. Math and focus Baseline and Math and Focus benchmark exam for grades K-2. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2018-19 CEP 24  Strengths Principal Hoke makes himself available to staff and parents alike. He takes responsibility for addressing said concerns. Looking where the school was in 2014-2015 to the latest reports, it is apparent that the dedication and enthusiasm from administration, teachers, and parents to foster critical-thinking skills and engage students continues to pay off. Investments in training and materials have resulted in significant improvement in the Framework for Great Schools area of Rigorous Instruction. Between the 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 Quality Review Reports, Instructional Core items 1.1 and 2.2 moved from Developing to Proficient. Between the 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 School Quality Guides the following NYC School Survey Measures showed improvements from student and teacher respondents:  Common Core Shifts in Literacy moved from 78% positive to 97% positive  Common Core Shifts in Math moved from 89% positive to 98% positive  Course Clarity moved from 75% positive to 78% positive  Quality of Student Discussion moved from 54% positive to 60% positive 282’s investment in ELA-related training and instructional materials such as the Teachers College Reading and Writing program continues to drive improvement in student achievement outcomes. This investment has driven improvement for the past two years. Between the 2014-2015 and 2016-2017 School Quality Guides ELA proficiency as measured by state test metrics has gone up for both the average as well as lowest third of students. Over the same period the percentage of students achieving or exceeding proficiency in state ELA tests has increased dramatically from 25.8% to 43.1%.[1] Weaknesses There has been a drop from 97% to 84% positive responses in the area of Instructional Leadership overall between the 2015-2016 and 2016-2017 NYC School Quality Surveys. Contributing to this are:  Percentage of teachers who agree or strongly agree that the Principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers dropped from 93% to 68%  Percentage of teachers who agree or strongly agree that the Principal knows what is going on in their classroom dropped from 100% to 74%  There have been ~10-15% drops in positive survey responses across a number of questions related to understanding expectations, vision, and standards The percentage of positive responses in Program Coherence has dropped from the 88% in 2016 to the 76% in the 2017 NYC School Survey. Teachers feel that their influence on school policy in the area of selecting instructional materials is lacking as indicated by only having 37% or responses being positive in the NYC School Survey (a drop from 57% the prior year). In the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report quality indicator 5.1 (Evaluate the quality of school- level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS) is rated as Developing. 2018-19 CEP 25  Only 33% of teachers responded to the NYC School Survey for 2016-2017. It is critical to hear more teacher voices to understand where the school is doing well and where there are opportunities for improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will answer the 2018-2019 School Quality survey and UFT created surveys which will influence the selection of instructional materials, instructional planning and overall clarity around expectations and standards. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish more formal and informal mechanisms for teachers to have access to and provide feedback to Principal. Set up a core group of teachers to be the voice of the teacher body and to provide teachers with a platform to ensure their voices are heard, they are consulted with and Principal involves them in key decision Use core group of teachers to help participate in planning and instructional design for classes, representing voices and opinions of teacher across the school. Use this group to channel vision and mission of school, reinforced by materials available to all summarizing school vision and mission . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2017 - June 2019 Teacher leaders, AP's and the Principal All teachers September 2017 - June 2019 Teacher leaders, AP's and the Principal Principal encourages and solicits ongoing feedback from teacher body. Principal will put time aside for teachers to respond during school time to the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. All teachers Implement Brave Trainings throughout the school and reinforce this in various channels, to ensure teachers feel they have the tools they need to deal with issues and conflict as it arises. Building culture of accountability and support for all teachers through Brave Training teaching - they should feel more empowered to step in when needed, regardless of who the student is, as they will all be working from one single curriculum familiar to students and teachers. All teachers September 2017 - June 2019 Teacher leaders, AP's and the Principal September 2017 - June 2019 Teacher leaders, AP's and the Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal and Guidance Counselors have workshops throughout the school year to promote parent activity in the school and to keep parents in the know on how to support their child at home. Parent Teacher conferences are held twice a year to meet with parents to address issues, concerns and progress of students.. We also have Movie night one Friday a month, School Dances etc. PTO has fundraisers to help support music and arts programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common meeting time provided in school’s schedule for support staff and teachers to meet ● Knowledgeable, experienced staff members will be the human resources to provide support and professional development for their colleagues Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By December 2018, administration will assess the school’s progress towards the goal by analyzing percentage of teacher survey responses, Brave Trainings meetings and instructional team meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 NYC School Quality Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A strong school community is one in which the school, parents and community work collaboratively to enhance the lives of students and empower them for the future. Our school community is in the process of creating this at 282. We need a greater population of our parents to be visible and engaged in helping our school community achieve greater success We are trying to enhance our Home-School connections in an effort to increase our students’ academic progress, performance and attendance. We need to continue to communicate our high expectations with our staff, students and families. It is imperative that we get our parents on board to assist and support them in helping their children achieve success. According to the NYC School Survey 2017-2018 Report, our school community shows strength in the following areas: ● School Culture Parents strongly agree that… - The school keeps them informed about what their children are learning - Students with disabilities are included in all student activities - Makes them feel welcome - Communicates in a language they can understand - Is responsive to parent feedback - Communicates to parents and students what they need to prepare students for college, career and success in life after high school - Parents are often invited to events at the school (workshop, program, performance, etc.) Teachers strongly agree that … - Our school communicates effectively with parents about their children’s progress - Our school encourages parents to participate in their children’s education According to the 2015 Quality Review, the school was found to be proficient in the following area: 2018-19 CEP 29  ● Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectation to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations. According to the NYC School Survey 2017-2018 report, our school community needs to improve in the following areas: ● School Culture - 55% of parents who responded to the survey have attended a parent-teacher conference 1-2 times and 1 % has never attended a parent-teacher conference - 63% of parents who responded to the survey have either attended a Parent Association/Parent teacher Association meeting 1-2 times or never attended a meeting ● Question –By-Question Survey results 53% strongly disagree/disagree that families at our school understand what the Common Core Learning Standards mean for their children Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the amount of Pre-K – Grade 8 parent workshops to strengthen the Home-School connection and to support student growth and parent involvement as measured by an increase in parents signing attendance . 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will provide parent workshops tailored to accommodate the needs of parents with high needs students especially for students with IEP's and ELL's.. The school will provide Common Core Learning Standards and/or NYS Assessment Workshops (Grades 3-8). The school will provide parent workshops geared towards the academic and socio-emotional needs of our elementary and middle school students. The school will provide opportunities for parents to become more involved in our school community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of students who are ELLs, receiving SETSS or ICT services, or in G&T classes. Parents of students in Grades 3-8, NYS Testing grades. Parents of our middle school students as well as parents of current fifth graders who are planning to attend our middle school. Parents of students in Grades Pre-K to 8. September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2019 The Administration Team, Core Team and/or the Professional Development Team, Parent Coordinator, and Service Providers. The Administration Team, Content Area Specialists, Parent Coordinator and Teacher Teams. The Administration Team, Middle School Teacher Teams, Guidance Team, service Providers ,the Dean and Parent Coordinator. September 2017 - June 2019 The Administration Team, Core Team, Parent Coordinator, PTO, and Staff. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Imani House, Kids Orbit, Super Smart, Tiny Scientist, and SASF Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common meeting time provided in school’s schedule for support staff and teachers to meet Knowledgeable, experienced staff members will be the human resources to provide support and professional development for their colleagues Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, we will assess the school’s progress towards the goal by reviewing the number of community building opportunities/workshops provided and the attendance rate at these events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance tracking sheet will measure the rates of parent attendance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who did not meet promotional criteria (PC) in previous year (ELA state exam, course work for 2014-2015 SY, Grades 3 to 5 TC running record, QRI5 Reading Assessment Students who did not meet PC in previous year (Math state exam), course work for 2014-2015 SY, Grades 3 to 5 TC running record and Go Math Benchmarks, QRI5 Reading Assessment When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ●During the school day ● Before school ● After school ● During lunch Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Close Reading, Shared reading and writing activities ●Whole class ●Small group ● Test sophistication ●Tutoring ● Text dependent and high level questioning ● Writing in response to literature ● Phonics and vocabulary support ●RTI ●Whole class ● During the school day ● Before school ● After school ●During lunch ● Exemplars ●Small group ● Problem-solving strategies ●Tutoring ● Real world connections ●Mathematics writing ●Partnerships including: LPP and Engage.org 2018-19 CEP 33  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who did not meet PC in previous year (Science state exam), course work for 2014-2015 SY, Grades 3 to 5 TC running record and Go Math Benchmarks, QRI5 Reading Assessment Students who did not meet PC in previous year (ELA and Math state exam), course work for 2014-2015 SY, Grades 3 to 5 TC running record and Go Math Benchmarks, QRI5 Reading Assessment Students who did not meet PC in previous year (ELA and Math state exam), course work for 2014-2015 SY, Grades 3 to 5 TC running record and Go Math Benchmarks, QRI5, Formal Behavioral Plans ● Green Zone – gardening ●Hands on science activities ●Reading/writing in the content area ●Educational trips during the school day and overnight ●Educational trips during the school day and overnight ●Whole class ●Small group ●Tutoring ●Whole class ●Small group ●Reading/writing in the content area ●Tutoring ●Career days ●Project based learning activities ●Counseling ●During the school day ●Before school ● After school ● During lunch ●During the school day ●Before school ●After school ●During lunch ●Whole class ●During the school day ●Engageschools.org ● Small group ●ESL services ●Tutoring ●Parent/ Teacher team meetings ●Before school ●After school ● During lunch 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide OPT bus transportation, care packages, School Supplies, N/A not title 1 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Nine (9) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A non title one school But with set aside funds we use it to give care packages, school supplies, backpacks etc.. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A not a title 1 school 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 38  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K282, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Park Slope School 282 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K282, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Park Slope Borough Brooklyn School Number 282 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rashan Hoke Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Jerome Benoit Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Plant Related-Service Provider Mrs Chuhan Superintendent B. Freeman Assistant Principal Ms. Katerina Sidbury Coach type here School Counselor Ms. H. Roberts Parent Mr. Marshall Parent Coordinator Ms. Baka Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 915 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.28%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use diverse assessmment toots to obtain information on how to prepare our ELLs for academic success. With the new innitiatives, ReadyGen and Go Math!, we plan to administer periodic assessment, combined with srategies and method fromTeacher’s College Balanced Literacy Program. The ESL teacher is provided with units of study and the NYS standards. The students are assessed to determine their “just-right” reading levels/English Acquisition, to ensure differentiated instructions. This differentiated instruction in Balanced Literacy is continued throughout administration of the NYSESLAT. Furthermore, over 60% of students who did not receive Proficient increased their score by one level. Broadly speaking, our students continue to struggle on the Reading section of the NYSESLAT, but we have seen growth on the Writing section. This year’s analysis of the NYSESLAT and NYSYTELL tests revealed students in most cohorts are scoring Intermediate on the NYSESLAT. The Reading/Writing sections seem to carry more weight than Speaking/Listening sections. What students score in Reading/Writing, usually determines their overall score. Students seem to struggle most in Reading and Writing. Across the modalities, we see a steady progression from Beginning to Intermediate to Advanced; however, Proficient is harder to achieve. 2018-19 CEP 48  Students in all cohorts struggle most in Reading and Writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Evaluation is a complex process that involves all stakeholders and must be an integral part of ESL instructional programs before, during, and after. When done appropriately, it can increase program effectiveness by providing valuable information about the impact of programs and highlighting areas where improvement is needed. We have had a constant increase in the number of students testing out or finding intermediate to proficiency in our program every year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] With respect to Respond to Intervention framework and how it is used to guide instructions, our goal is to provide quality ESL based methods. We use content area instruction and ESL standards and methods in order for students to meet the necessary skills and pass city and state standardized tests. Students are exposed to hands-on activities, technology research and all other facilities within the school to ensure academic success. those who are at the advanced stages are exposed to the Internet for research based academic instruction. The students at all three stages use Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, Learning Today, and personalized computer based programs, to enhance their skills in literacy and math, in addition to Go Math!/ReadyGen. This program is indicative of students’ strengths and weaknesses in fundamental literacy and math skills. The data from this program is analyzed and used to drive instruction in English acquisition skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT test measures four areas; Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. It revealed most of our ELLs struggled with reading and writing modalities than Listening and Speaking modalties. Performance on these areas will drive intructions. Those who shown weakness in Reading/Writing will concentrate on these areas to ensure passing that area/modality next test. Same for those who shown weakness in Listening/Speaking or all four areas, will focus on these weakness areas to ensure improvements. Our goal is to provide quality ESL based instruction. We use content area instruction and ESL standards and methods in order for students to meet the necessary skills and pass city and state standardized tests. Students are exposed to hands-on activities, technology research and all other facilities within the school. Those who are at the advanced stages are exposed to the Internet for research based academic instructions. The students at all three stages will engage in Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT for all grades, Ready Gen, Learning Today, and personalized computer based programs, to enhance their skills in literacy and math, using Go Math!. This program is indicative of students’ strengths and weaknesses in fundamental literacy and math skills. The data from this program is analyzed and used to drive instruction. Broadly speaking, our students continue to struggle on the Reading section of the NYSESLAT, but we have seen growth on the Writing section of the same exam. This year’s analysis of the NYSESLAT and LAB-R tests revealed the following information: Overall, students in most cohorts are scoring Intermediate on the NYSESLAT. The Reading/Writing sections seem to carry more weight than Speaking/Listening sections. What students score in Reading/Writing, usually determines their overall score. Students in all cohorts struggle most in Reading and Writing. Across the cohorts, we see a steady progression from Beginning and Intermediate to Advanced; however, Proficient is harder to achieve. he ESL program. We also provide standard based instruction in content areas. Based on early literacy assessments results, ELL students are exposed to weekly vocabulary through the use of visual aids and Hands -on materials to improve their comprehension. 2018-19 CEP 49  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ESL program at PS/MS 282 provides a Pull-out service. The students are grouped by grade and proficiency. The ESL curriculum follows the Teacher College Reading and Writing Curriculum and is aligned with the City curricula for Math, Science and Social Studies. Planning for instruction is done in consultation with classroom teachers and the school’s instructional staff. The ESL teacher, Mr. Jerome Benoit, has a certificate in TESOL. Newly arrived ELL’s and SIFE’s ( Students with Interrupted Formal Education) participate in intensive Pull-out classes in Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills as they approach Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. Their curriculum aims to develop vocabulary, emphasize syntax, encourage oral expression with proper pronunciation and lower the student’s affective filter in order to promote a classroom experience conducive to learning. Intermediate and Advanced ELLs receive instruction aimed at increasing their proficiency in Writing and Reading in the English Language since according to NYSESLAT results, these areas/modalities are most challenged. Instruction is developed in alignment with classroom instruction. Many of the students also receive AIS (Academic Intervention Services) and/or Resource Room services. Some students receive extended day services. The ESL classroom, like all classes within PS/MS 282, provides a rich and varied learning environment that supports ELL’s as they acquire English skills. It utilizes visual resources including pictures, word wall, and charts and technology with internet based interactive programs aim at supporting ELLs. Use of native languages is encouraged and respected within the ESL program. Research shows that maintaining and utilizing native languages during English acquisition is greatly beneficial and the ESL program at PS/MS 282 reflects this philosophy. All teachers are involved in professional development experiences that enhance their ability to work with ELLs. Technical assistance as well as Instructional PD sessions are available for teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Mendated service for ELLs is outlined in the CR Part 154 regulation. It highlights how many hours a day ELL students are serviced. Students in Bilingual programs or Free standing ESL programs, must receive a certain number of period of instruction based on Language and English level. Begginners receive 360 per week, Intermediate also 360 and those at the Advanced level receive 180 minutes per week. At our school we have a Pull-out Puch-in ESL program. Students are pulled out depending on grade and level based on assessment scores. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 CEP 50  Students receive comprehensible core content instruction throughout the day. The content is from grade level curricula taught using instructional strategies that scaffold the content learning by building background knowledge and through the use of visuals, gestures, manipulatives, paraphrasing, etc. Lessons have clear grade level, content and language objectives 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure ELLs are appropriately evaluate in their home language by first making sure the native laguage that will be evaluated is dominant, in order to have a valid assessment based on comprehension of subject matter. Informal assessment is done when students first arrived. Also, we connect with our parents for feedback and advise them to continue to engage their children in their native laguage. We promote speaking with them in their native laguage. Students learn a new language more quickly when they are constanlty exposed to their native language, according to research. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In order to tackle challenges that SIFE and newcomers encounter, the school will develop assessment (and instructional) activities that are geared to the students' current levels of English proficiency. Performance-based assessment activities can concentrate on oral communication. Each student comes to school, not only with unique academic needs, but also with unique background experiences, culture, language, personality, interests, and attitudes toward learning. Effective teachers recognize that all of these factors affect how students learn in the classroom, and they adjust, or differentiate, their instruction to meet students' needs. Examples of commonly-used activity types designed for tackling SIFE and Newcomers are: a. Reading with partners, retelling stories, role playing, giving descriptions or instructions using visual or written prompts b. Oral reporting, telling the basic elements of a story by using a sequence of three or more pictures c. Completing dialogue or conversation through written prompts d. Debating, either one-on-one or taking turns in small groups e. Brainstorming, interactive/eductional games. As for ELLs that have been receiving services 4 to 6 years, these activities will be modified depending on English acquisition level. Long term ELLs will be engaged in challenging, theme-based curricula activities; this helps build students' academic and content concepts. Infusing students' cultures, backgrounds, experiences, and languages into lessons and curriculum,as well as collaborative activities and scaffolded instruction, can help build students' academic English proficiency and help students value themselves as learners. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All active ELLs are assessed annually to determine progress in acquiring English proficiency. In the IEP, a comprehensive description of the student’s strengths and needs in accessing and achieving at age appropriate grade expectations in the general curriculum. In short, when we write instructional goals we have to know what the child needs to learn and what action we want to see. We will measure progress toward the goal. Finally, we set a level of mastery that we expect. We use standardized tests and informal assessments to measure a child's progress toward the goals. We can do tallies or checklists or give tests specific to the action we seek. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ESL classroom, like all classes within PS/MS 282, provides a rich and varied learning environment that supports ELL’s as they acquire English skills. It utilizes visual resources including pictures, word wall, and charts and technology with internet based interactive programs aim at supporting ELLs. Use of native languages is encouraged and respected within the ESL program. Research shows that maintaining and utilizing native languages during English acquisition is greatly beneficial and the 2018-19 CEP 51  ESL program at PS/MS 282 reflects this philosophy. All teachers are involved in professional development experiences that enhance their ability to work with ELLs including those with IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In planning RTI services, it is important to understand the program in which ELLs are enrolled, how their native language and English proficiency is assessed and monitored, and the core literacy program they receive for development of native language and/or English literacy skills. The ESL teacher has been provided with the curriculum that the school is utilizing. Our ELLs have available AIS team who push-in to support in other content areas, like math, science, ELA etc.. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to use the programs we mentioned above and other srategies that have been working for our ELLs. In addition, this year we will use ReadyGen and GoMath! in conjunction with ESL methodologies to deliver instructions. Close reading component highlight in ReadyGen and GoMath! provide essential elements and strategic approches that benefit ELL language development. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will continue to provide ESL services using all elements and fondamentals provided by all the programs that we have been using. We will make appropriate changes to correspond to specific challenges as they become evident. We will connect new innitiatives to existing and will adapt constructive startegies appropriate to language development. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. As new innitiatives, programs or activities are implemented at our school, they are made available to ALL students. ELL parents who requested are provided information in their native language so they can be kept aware of vital information concerning their ELL language acquidition. In addition, letters are sent to parents explaining opportunities for ELLs to participate in various programs during and after school, that are available to meet their needs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teaching a second language can be an arduous and painful task, or it can be a fun and rewarding experience. Second language learners can be apathetic or enthusiastic students depending on their classroom experiences. We will set the tone with our attitudes and expressions as well as with the activities in which we choose to involve ELLs. Its also important that students are engaged in fun, informative activities that provide students with meaningful learning of content as well as second language acquisition toward increasing their English language proficiency. All ELLs have the same access to instructional materials including, technology, as everyone else who attends PS282. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Research conducted shows that reading in the native language aids the acquisition of and reading ability in a second language. By connecting language support, learners are able to engage their oral language, culture, and experience to meaningful literacy activities. English language learners come to program with a variety of experiences. They also come with many strengths embedded in their language, culture, and experiences. By incorporating learners' native language, we will have the potential to draw upon these strengths in facilitating a smooth transition. We encourage parents to continue to engage their children in speaking their native language at home. Research shows when children maintain their native language at home, it facilitates a more effectively acquisition of a new language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our approach for helping ELLs on a daily basis includes, small-group instruction, assessment (including benchmark tests, and other forms of ongoing formative assessment), frequent teacher assessments to ensure that the instruction they receive is effective. It's important to also note that these students also participate in various other programs in our school. AIS, RTI, after school programs - Project intervention. We use content area instruction and appropriate ESL standards in order for students to 2018-19 CEP 52  meet the necessary skills to meet and pass city and state assessments. Students are exposed to hands-on activities, technology research, and all other facilities within the school to aid in their success. Those who are at the advanced stages are exposed to the Internet for research based academic instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teaching a second language can be an arduous and painful task, or it can be a fun and rewarding experience. Second language learners can be apathetic or enthusiastic students depending on their classroom experiences. We will set the tone with our attitudes and expressions as well as with the activities in which we choose to involve ELLs. Its also important that students are engaged in fun, informative activities that provide students with meaningful learning of content as well as second language acquisition toward increasing their English language proficiency. All ELLs have the same access to instructional materials including, technology, as everyone else who attends PS282. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our new English language learners are eager to read the environmental print that surrounds them. We take advantage of this natural interest to help students learn to read in English and gain information about their community at the same time, pair newcomers with a student who has been here a little longer, take a trips around community for signs such as Welcome to ..., Exit, etc… Our newly arrived ELLs obtain support in all facet of the school. Ms Baka, our parent coordinator has been facilitate our parents whenever feasable with vital information. Mrs. Collins, who is fluent in Spanish also provides our ELLS and their parents with programs and activities appropriate to support our ELLs. We have launched a 282 website, where all activities involving our school is posted for all to access. Everyone is informed and well aware of all activities and programs that are going on at our school, including all our ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In planning RTI services, it is important to understand the program in which ELLs are enrolled, how their native language and English proficiency is assessed and monitored, and the core literacy program they receive for development of native language and/or English literacy skills. The ESL teacher has been provided with the curriculum that the school is utilizing. The ELL teacher meets with other staff on a weekly basis (PD) to discuss progress and ways to better assist ELLs. Our ELL teacher Mr. Benoit, receive Professional development on various common core learning standards in order to better serve our ELLs. We will continue to use the programs we mentioned and other srategies that have been working for our ELLs. In addition, this year we will use ReadyGen and GoMath! in conjunction with ESL methodologies to deliver instructions. Close 2018-19 CEP 53  reading component highlight in ReadyGen and GoMath! provide essential elements and strategic approches that benefit ELL language development. Also our ESL provider receive Professional development appropriate to ESL instructions whenever feasable. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Mrs Robberts, our school counselor assists and connects with various High Schools around the city to support all students including ELLs. We have a team in place that assist in this transition. Our ELLs are well informed and are welcome to arrange meeting to come sit with this team who will facilitate and guide them through this transition. As new innitiatives, programs or activities are implemented at our school, they are made available to ALL students. ELL parents who requested are provided information in their native language so they can be kept aware of vital information concerning their ELL language acquidition as they transition to HS or Elementary to Middle schools. Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs, which is examined during team meetings (consisting of teachers, administrators, guidance counselors and service providers). Data is reviewed and discussions take place with regard to the student progress and possible interventions that can take place and how they will be delivered. CR Part 154 hightlights Mendated service for ELLs and professional developments requirements to better serve ELLs. Students in Bilingual programs or Free standing ESL programs, must receive a certain number of period of instruction based on Language and English level. Begginners receive 360 per week, Intermediate also 360 and those at the Advanced level receive 180 minutes per week. At our school we have a Pull-out push in ESL program. Students are pulled out depending on grade and level based on assessment scores. During our weekly Professional development, including in our agenda, are strategies and challenges that we need to address to assist our ELLs. Records are kept in the in the main office and with ELS provider. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We always include our parents in anything involving academic growth of their children. we have extended conversation on how to better serve each student. By connecting language support, parental involvment, learners are able to engage their oral language, culture, and experience to meaningful literacy activities. English language learners come to program with a variety of experiences. They also come with many strengths embedded in their language, culture, and experiences. By incorporating learners' native language, we will have the potential to draw upon these strengths in facilitating a smooth transition. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Research conducted shows that reading in the native language aids the acquisition of and reading ability in a second language. By connecting language support, learners are able to engage their oral language, culture, and experience to meaningful literacy activities. English language learners come to program with a variety of experiences. They also come with many strengths embedded in their language, culture, and experiences. By incorporating learners' native language, we will have the potential to draw upon these strengths in facilitating a smooth transition. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rashan Hoke, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Park Slope School DBN: 13K282 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Hoke Ms Katerina Ms. Baka Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator MR. Jerome Benoit ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mr Marshall Parent Mr. Plant Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Roberts School Counselor Mrs. B Freeman Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/17/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K282 School Name: Park Slope Superintendent: B. Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. It is vital that we communicate whenever feasible with non-English speaking parents in their home language in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. At our school Mrs. Cortez who is fluent in both Spaninsh and English translates any information we need to submit to parents/guardians. Mr. Benoit, the ESL teacher also is fluent in Haitian Creole, French and English relates any information to parents in those laguages so they can be kept informed on how they can assist in their children academic progress and language development. Parents are made aware and understand the HLIS, student emergency contact and wahtever vital information that they need to know it order to facilitate in the school cummunity. During registration, parents are provided with the HILS form. In that form, if the parents checked that there is a language other than English spoken in the home, that is basis for administration of the NYSITELL. All parents or guardians of newly enrolled students are required to complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). If 2018-19 CEP 58  parents don’t speak English, we ensure translation is provided in completing the HILS form, administered by a trained pedagogue, at our schools, Mr. Benoit, or Ms. Chen, the ESL providers. English Language Learners performance on this test (NYSITELL), determines child’s entitlement to English language development support services. Once your child is tested, the school notifies parents to advise eligibility for English language development services. After notification of entitlement services, we required to hold orientations for parents or guardians of newly enrolled ELLs to invite them to the school where they will view a video explaning different ELL programs that are available. During the orientation, parents have the opportunity to receive materials about ELL programs in their home language, and to ask questions about ELL services (with assistance from a translator, if necessary).All parents or guardians of newly enrolled students are required to complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), administered by a trained pedagogue, at our schools, Mr. Benoit, and Ms. Chen, the ESL providers. Once the student is identified to be entitled for ESL services, a letter is sent to parents to inform them that their child will be receiving ESL instructions. At that time, letters are sent to parents with a scheduled date and time to invite them to parent orientation where they will watch a video explaining all the program choices available to them. If a child has been identified and no letters are returned for the orientation, then the child will be placed in Transitional Bilingual Education as per CR Part 154, if available at school. All forms that are returned are kept in files/folders in ESL assigned location. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language After a review of the needs assessment findings, it is determined that our school, a needs for oral/written Spanish translator. Teachers have been informed that parent notices must be sent home in Spanish and also any languages that parents need to be notified. Also, when speaking to parents during parent teacher conferences, teachers secure a translator when necessary in order to provide full explanation and understanding of each program and what is offered. We always include our parents in anything involving academic growth of their children. we have extended conversation on how to better serve each student. We have a good representation of yemenese and Arabic speakers at our school. We incorperate other 2018-19 CEP 59  yemenese and Arabic families who speak English to provide understading and clarity to other families who may not speak English. By connecting language support, parental involvment, learners are able to engage their oral language, culture, and experience to meaningful literacy activities. English language learners come to our program with a variety of experiences. They also come with many strengths embedded in their language, culture, and experiences. By incorporating learners' native language, parental involment, we will have the potential to draw upon these strengths in facilitating a smooth transition.There is a small population of ELLs at our school. This fosters an on-going communication between parents and the school community. Parents consistently volunteer and provide assistance in various ways. We connect with parents of long-term ELLs, who understand our school culture and ESL program, to provide our non-speakers and new-comers understanding and clarity on what they need to know in order to facilitate academic success for their children. Because of their presence in our school, they develop a bond where they support each other for a common goal. they are comfortable to aquire and ask for any support or help from staff members. With the support of Ms Collins, our community coordinator who is fluent in Spanish, we are able to provide and facilitate our Spanish Speakers support and clarity on how to better 2018-19 CEP 60  engage their students in academic gowth.Conversations with parents are vital, and it is very important for parents to obtain information in order to facilitate a smooth transition and successful language acquisition for ELLs. The school encourages parents to be involved in their children's education, enabling them to communicate using their native language. If necessary, the school assists parents in getting in touch with people who speak their language outside of the school community in oder to provide assistant and awareness on how they can contribute in their children academic success. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. At our school, we have on staff members who are fluent in the languages that are represented in our school. When disseminating information to parents, we incorperate our staff members who translate information in the parents native language. There is also a PTO website, where parents remain 2018-19 CEP 61  informed of all activities going on at our school. Mrs Colins, our community coordinator, who also fluent in both English and Spanish provides vital information and keep parents aware of what they need to know in order At our schoolto help their children at home and school. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? At our school, parents are welcome to visit and interact with staff when posible. Informal encouters with parents is constant. During drop off to school, family night and other activities that we provide to our students, we take the advatage to inform and provide parents with information they need to know, whether its how to completed lunch forms, parents survey etc.. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 CEP 62   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In fulfilling and in falling allign with Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, We ensure the following important school documents have been translated and are available electronically and/or in hard copy: • Report cards • Registration and admission • Parent Handbook • Discipline letters/codes • Testing memorandums • Chancellor’s code of conduct • Medical forms through our Spanish speaking medical assistant Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? It is strongly recommended that schools, in consultation with parents, use a sample template as a framework for the information to be included in their parental involvement policy. The template is available in the eight major languages on the NYCDOE website. Schools, in consultation with parents, are encouraged to include other relevant and agreed upon activities and actions as well that will support effective parental involvement and strengthen student academic achievement. The school parent involvement policy must be provided and disseminated in the major languages spoken by the majority of parents in the school. Community organizations also help us support our families. Our PTO works with the school to support students that may have family problems and to facilitate the integration of young immigrants in their communities. The School Leadership Team decides specific needs of parents and this information is shared with other school constituencies. Monthly PTA meetings are venues for parents to provide viable input to school administration. During these meetings, the parent coordinator, Ms Baka, provides parents with questions and comment forms to be filled out and decisions are made by the school's Leadership Team to implement suggestions received from parents including ELL parents. 2018-19 CEP 63 
