2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K290 School Name: P.S. 290 JUAN MOREL CAMPOS Principal: BRIGITTE NEWELL 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 19K290 718-827-5842 Fax: Email Address: sosullivan@schools.nyc.gov School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Elementary 331900010290 PK-5 135 Schenck Avenue 718-647-1113 Phone Number: Scott O'Sullivan School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Brigitte Newell Dr. Byron Wilson Ms. Wilenny Fernandez Scott O'Sullivan N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 19 Dr. Thomas McBryde, Jr. Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11207 Superintendent’s Office Address: TMbryde@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2741 Phone Number: 718-240-2747 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7189353828 Phone Number: 718-935-3444 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Brigitte Newell Dr. Byron Wilson Vacancy N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Milagro Alvarez Lizeth Pasco Liz Espinal *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KissundaiSeepaul Member/Parent Michele Bianco Danielle Vitale Yvonne Phillip Scott O’Sullivan Alex Cromwell Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Vision Section 4: CEP Overview Our collective responsibility is to join hands, heads, and hearts to develop and strengthen our children intellectually, socially and emotionally. Through collaboration we will maximize the implementation and impact of our comprehensive instructional programs so that all teachers and learners become highly competent, critical thinking citizens. 2018-19 CEP 9  School Mission The mission of P.S. 290, the Juan Morel Campos School, in partnership with our staff, administration, parents and community, is to provide every student in every classroom with the foundations and supportive skills needed to become lifelong learners and effective problem solvers in a competitive, global society. Toward that mission, we embrace the following motto: Pride - In ourselves and in our school. Achievement - To strive to do our best. Excellence – In our work and behavior. Equity and Diversity Statement Our goal is to cultivate a diverse community in which each student can achieve their full potential. This will shape our next generation of life long learners and empower the students of P.S. 290 on a path to success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located in the East New York section of Brooklyn, P.S. 290 is surrounded by many single and multi-family dwellings. It is bordered by Schenck Avenue, Fulton Street, Barbey Street and Atlantic Avenue. The school is housed in a small, compact building. The school serves a diverse ethnic population of 519 students from pre-kindergarten through grade five. All classes at P.S. 290 are heterogeneously grouped. We have one Pre-Kindergarten class. In kindergarten there are three monolingual classes and one bilingual class. In first grade there are three monolingual classes, and one bilingual class. In second grade there are three monolingual classes and one bilingual class. In third grade there are three monolingual classes. In fourth grade there are three monolingual classes. In fifth grade there are three monolingual classes. There is an Integrated Co-Teaching class on each grade. There is a class containing the cohort of ENL students on each grade. We also have a first-grade self-contained special needs class, a first/second bridge self-contained special needs class, a third/fourth bridge self-contained special education class and a fourth/fifth bridge self-contained special education class, all of which serve a 12:1:1 model. In literacy, analysis of data from running records (MOSL) for general education students, ENL students, and special needs students indicates the following: Results reveal that 71% of our students in grades K-5 are performing on or above grade level. The results of the running records assessments show a need for focus on comprehension and vocabulary development Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups would be extended time on task, differentiated instruction, visual aides, manipulatives, and multi-media supports. In math, analysis of data from Go Math assessments for general education students, ENL students, and special needs students indicates the following: Results reveal that 49% of our students in grades K-5 are performing on or above grade level. The results of the assessments show a need for focus on measurement and numeration. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups would be the use of manipulatives, technology, extended time on task, differentiated instruction, and visual aides. 2018-19 CEP 10  The following committees have been formed: School Assessment Team, Pupil Personnel Team/Least Restrictive Environment Team, School Implementation Team (SIT), Safety Committee, Attendance Committee, Building Response Team, School Leadership Team, Action Research Teams, MOSL Team, Response to Intervention/Assessment Team, Student Council, Administrative Cabinet Team, School Inquiry Teacher Teams, De-escalation Committee, Crisis Intervention Team, Suicide Prevention Team, School Culture Committee, and a School Based Staff Development Committee. Always keeping the best interest of our students in mind, aligning the curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards is done as a collaborative team inclusive of administrators, teachers and parents. Our instructional emphasis is to align with Federal, State and City mandates, and Performance Standards. We provide instruction using scientifically research-based programs as part of our curriculum. Curricula decisions are a result of student performance and need as shown through observations and assessment data. Teacher, parent, and student input are taken into account and ultimately curricula decisions are reached by all stakeholders. Curriculum Overview Curriculum Mapping and Unit Planning are ongoing throughout the year and adjusted as often as necessary. We maintain an interdisciplinary approach and infuse the arts and technology throughout the curriculum. Programs/ Content Assessment Tools/Frequency Method of Feedback Resources Article-a-Day, Words for the Wise, Guided Reading, Ready Gen, Running Records (3x/yr)-Baseline MOSL (BOY) Practice ELA (MOY) Close Reading, Standardized Test for the Assessment of Reading (STAR) – Renaissance (Ongoing- progress monitoring) Fundations, Literature Circles ELA 120-Minute Block Ready NY Teacher's College Units of Study Writing System 44 Read 180 iRead Perf. Tasks (ReadyGen Units – grade specific) Teacher Made Assessments (periodically) State ELA (1x/yr) NYSESLAT (1x/yr) NYSAA (1x/yr) Rubrics (Ongoing) Wilson Program Bulletin Boards (bi-monthly) Harcourt - Journeys (K & 1st) Student Conferencing (Ongoing) Fountas & Pinnell Literacy System (2nd & 3rd) Observing/Monitoring Students (Instruction/Ind. Work) Data Spread Sheets Teacher Data Meetings Observation Feedback (formal & informal) Walkthrough feedback Teacher Teams/Lesson Study Feedback (teacher, peer, self) 2018-19 CEP 11  Balanced Literacy (4th & 5th Grades) Portfolios/Checklists (grade specific timeline) Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) Teacher's College Units of Study Writing Baseline Assessments and End of Unit Writing Assessment Super Readers ReadyGen Baseline Assessment (4th & 5th Grades) ReadyGen Unit Tests (4th & 5th Grades) TC Writing Performance Tasks Go Math Topic Assessments/Grade specific performance tasks Math (STAR) – Renaissance (Ongoing- progress monitoring) Teacher Made Assessments (periodically) Operate That Number, Exemplar, Coach Designed Assessments (3x/yr BOY/MOY/EOY) Math – 70-90 Minute Block Go Math, Skill-Related Games, Mathletics State Math (1x/yr) Rubrics (Ongoing) Bulletin Boards (monthly) Student Conferencing Observing/Monitoring Students (Instruction/Ind. Work) Portfolios/Checklists (grade specific timeline) Teacher Made Assessments (periodically) Coach BOY/MOY/EOY Assessments (3x/yr) Harcourt Science Baseline MOSL (BOY) Grades K-2 & 5 State Gr. 4 ESPET Science Rubrics (Ongoing) Amplify Science Bulletin Boards (bi-monthly) Grades 3-4 Student Conferencing Data Spread Sheets Teacher Data Meetings Observation Feedback (formal & informal) Walkthrough feedback Teacher Teams/Lesson Study Feedback (teacher, peer, self) Observation Feedback (formal & informal) Teacher Teams/Lesson Study Feedback (teacher, peer, self) Observing/Monitoring Students (Instruction/Ind. Work) 2018-19 CEP 12  Social Studies Passport, Trade books Portfolios/Checklists (grade specific timeline) Teacher Made Assessments (periodically) Coach BOY/MOY/EOY Assessments (3x/yr) Rubrics (Ongoing) Bulletin Boards (monthly) Student Conferencing Observation Feedback (formal & informal) Teacher Teams/Lesson Study Observing/Monitoring Students (Instruction/Ind. Work) Feedback (teacher, peer, self) Portfolios/Checklists (grade specific timeline) P.S 290 offers additional services that include, but are not limited to the following: After School Intervention and Enrichment, Basketball, Academic Intervention Services, STEM Fair, Parent Workshops, Fitness Programs for adults and children, Response To Intervention, Parent ENL classes, Nutrition classes, Parent Book Club, Dance Program (Ballet Tech), Debate Program, and Talent Extravaganzas. P.S. 290 has partnerships with the following organizations: Ballet Tech, Girls on the Run, Good Shepherd Services, Franklyn K. Lane NYC School Volunteers Program, Brooklyn Public Library, Arts Connection, Urban Strategies, NYC Mental Health and New York Psychotherapy. We strive to promote and create independent learners and problem solvers. Our student-led/student autonomy implementation is across all classrooms and has positively impacted our school in a variety of ways. Our foci, Evidence in Argument, was a springboard for debate tactics and techniques. A way to develop presentation skills, oratory skills, and debate techniques, was to encourage student-led learning/student autonomy. This practice, along with our school foci directly aligns to the Danielson Framework being that, for most domains, in order to be highly effective, students need to take the initiative and/or take ownership of their learning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There are two free standing ENL programs. Emerging and entering students receive 360 minutes of ENL, and transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction and commanding students receive 45 minutes of Native Language Arts (NLA) instruction in content areas daily. The Special Needs component includes ICT, 12:1:1, SETSS, Push-in teachers and the IEP teacher. Special services are provided for children in need of speech, hearing, adaptive physical education, physical therapy and occupational therapy. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past school year, our school made the most progress in Rigorous Instruction. Moving forward, the key area of focus for 2018-2019 will be to strengthen Trust and Strong Family/Community Ties. Over the course of the 2018-2019 , we will strengthen our ties and trust with families/community by bringing in resources and building partnerships with outside agencies. Periodically, we will create a telephone parent survey as well as a paper survey as a means of eliciting feedback from the parents. In addition, the Parent Coordinator will 2018-19 CEP 13  provide parents with a parent involvement suggestion form after parent meeting in order to guide future activities/events and workshops that include CBOs and other guests to suit the needs of our community. 2018-19 CEP 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K290 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 525 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 37 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.3% % Reduced Lunch 22.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 74.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.63 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 70 70 92.9% 2.3% 22.1% 20.8% 2.5% 1.1% 4 3% 5.3 35.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: In order to meet the challenges and rigor of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS), we have designed a comprehensive literacy program. Our Literacy program addresses the six shifts required by CCSS by providing a research based approach to teaching the five components of reading instruction. Need: Analysis of data from STAR Reading test results for the subgroups Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENLs) indicates the following: Results reveal that 34% of the students in subgroups Students with Disabliities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENLs) in grades K-5 made gains of 100 points in their Scaled Scores. The results of the STAR Reading testing show a need for targeted focus on literacy, rigorous instruction, progress monitoring, and tracking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of our students in subgroups Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENLs) in grades K-5 will show an increase of 100 points or higher in their Scaled Scores as evident by STAR Reading test results. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of Fundations for K-2, Harcourt Journeys for K-1, Fountas and Pinnell Literacy System for 2-3, and Balanced Literacy with ReadyGen for 4-5. Teacher will differentiate instruction based on student needs and data during the 120 literacy block. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups would be extended time on task, differentiated instruction, visual aides, manipulatives, multi-media supports, etc. In grade specific teacher teams, teachers will work with flexible targeted populations in areas of high need. Intervention for targeted students K-2(I-Read) grades 3-5 (Read 180) and (System 44) as well as Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention. Ongoing differentiated professional development will be provided to staff, focusing on topics and strategies targeted for our subgroups such as, but not limited to the following: using data to drive instruction and set goals, aligning curriculum to Common Core Standards, use of rubrics, academic rigor in performance tasks, Depth of Knowledge, The Five Social-Emotional Competencies, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Strategies, Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) and parental involvement. Parental Involvement activities focusing on ELA will be conducted. Specifically, ENL parent classes are provided five days per week, ELA workshops are given, focusing on how parents can best support their children in literacy. Parents are invited to participate in school-wide literacy events such as Books and Breakfast, etc. Attend workshops during Tuesday's Parent Engagement Time. After school programs will be provided to targeted students to provide additional test preparation strategies and skills . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Weekly, September, 2018 – June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teachers Teachers September, 2018 – June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teachers Parents September, 2018– June, 2019 Administrators, Teachers, PA, Parent Coordinator Grade-wide collaborative unit planning will focus on improving student outcomes- formative and summative , best practices through rigorous instruction, culminating activities and will strengthen relationships and trust between teachers. Teachers Weekly, September, 2018 – June, 2019 Administrators, Coaches, Grade/Cluster Leaders 2018-19 CEP 17  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home through many ways. Parental involvement activities/workshops throughout the school year will focus on rigorous instruction aligned to the Common Core. Our timeline will encompass activities that will occur Monthly/Weekly/As Needed, from September 2018 – June 2019. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principals, coaches, IEP teacher, related services, and teachers. Activities will be provided at workshops at PTA meetings, Open School Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent-Teacher Engagement Tuesdays, Testing Grades meetings, and more. Topics will include but will not be limited to technology workshops for I Read, System44, and Read 180. Further understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core will be attended to through trainings, newsletters, RTI updates, curricula benchmarks on the monthly calendar. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time twice a week for all teachers. Professional Development every Monday for all teachers. ENL program from the Office of Adult and Continuing Education - coordinates with the instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal by providing parents and students with the opportunity to learn English as a second language. After School- coordinates with the instructional strategies/activities to achieve this goal by providing additional time beyond the school day to target skill deficiencies in English language arts. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-year benchmark will be conducted in February, 2019. The mid-point benchmark will indicate that 40% of our students of the subgroups Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English as a New Language (ENLs) in grades K-5 will show an increase of 100 points or higher in their Scaled Scores as evident by STAR Reading test results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark is the STAR Reading test results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We are committed to maintaining a supportive learning environment where students are respectful, kind, safe, ready to learn, responsible and engaged at all times. Strengths: The students, parents, and teachers feel safe and comfortable with each other and in turn contribute to each others academic and social needs, raising every one’s motivation and overall feeling of community. Needs: We continue to refine our Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) and peer mediation process as a means to enhance the effectiveness of the students’ abilities to be respectful, kind, safe, ready to learn, responsible and engaged at all times. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an improvement in student behaviors as a result of using Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) as by showing a 5% or more decrease in Level 3 or higher incidents as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Pep Rallies, Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Award Ceremonies, Respect For All lessons, peer mediation, student council, and a full time SAVE room teacher will be used as research based programs, professional development, and or systems and structures needed to impact change. Some strategies used to address the ELL and special needs students with disabilities and all other high-need student sub groups will be implemented through utilizing the Guidance Counselor, Academic Intervention Service team, the BTG Social Worker and the SAT Family Worker. Students Students In an effort to increase family involvement, the Teachers Parent Coordinator, PTA, and Family Assistant will be used to heighten communication between the schools and families via newsletters, websites, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, meetings, workshops, etc . Parents, Students Teachers and students will also play a big role in creating an element of trust within the capacity framework through student-led learning. Staff will participate in Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) workshops. Teachers will also build student autonomy and allow students to take the initiative and become more responsible and accountable for their learning by leading parts of lessons, engage in grade-wide debates, and other activities during the school day and after school. Students, All Staff Teachers, Guidance Counselor Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselor PA, Parent Coordinator, Family Assistant Administration, Teachers, Students Monthly, September, 2018-June, 2019 Monthly, September, 2018-June, 2019 Monthly, September, 2018-June, 2019 Monthly, September, 2018-June, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home. Parental involvement activities/workshops throughout the school year will focus on their understanding of Supportive Environment and Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS). Our timeline will encompass activities that will occur Monthly/Weekly/As Needed, from September 2018 – June 2019 through PTA meetings, newsletters and Parent Engagement Tuesdays. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principals, coaches, teachers, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, SAVE room teacher, AIS team, SAT Family Worker, BTG Social Worker, students [student-led demonstrations]. Topics will include but will not be limited to Positive 2018-19 CEP 21  Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS), Respect for All literature, Social-Emotional Workshops, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Workshops, Second Cup of Coffee Parent Meeting, New York Psychotherapy Outreach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We utilize personnel resources in addition to the below. Personnel utilized include fifth grade students in a peer mediation programs, SAVE room person/Dean personnel, and the De-escalation members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year benchmark will be conducted in February, 2019. The mid-point benchmark that will indicate our schools progress towards meeting our goal of a 5% or more decrease in Level 3 or higher incidents as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark is the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Staff, students, and parents have embraced student-led learning. It is evident in classrooms that students are taking an ownership role as facilitators and are empowered in helping lead their peers. Needs: Advance data shows that 45% of teachers scored Effective or Highly Effective on Domain 3 (b) Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Teachers will foster higher orders thinking skills that will be evident in students' writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaborate on strategies for fostering student led discussions in order to promote higher order thinking skills resulting in an increase in student ability to engage in thoughtful discourse as evident in a 5% increase in Teachers College Writing rubric scores. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers participate monthly in inquiry team meetings to plan, schedule, and provide feedback for lesson studies. This practice creates the forum for teachers to collaborate and develop a shared understanding of what high-quality instruction looks like (Elmore, 2009). School Coaches will work directly with teachers to address professional development needs, specifically for subgroups (e.g., overage, STH, ELLs) as informed by lesson studies. Also, teachers will focus on the needs of students with disabilities and ELLS during lesson studies in order to improve teacher practices. As informed by lesson studies, teachers learn and develop best practices and will be able to share strategies with parents. Tuesdays, during parent engagement time, teachers take time to increase parental content awareness, and to arm parents with the necessary skills to help their children. Learning opportunities for both parents and teachers will develop competence for all parties involved. These engagement opportunities (e.g. Books & Breakfast, Morning Math, etc.) will be provided in order to build upon trust, and mutual respect . Teachers, Parents, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Monthly, Principal, Assistant Principals September, 2018 – June, 2019 Teachers As Needed, Coaches September, 2018 – June, 2019 Parents Weekly, Administration, Coaches, Teachers September, 2018– June, 2019 As Scheduled, Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches September, 2018– June, 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home. Parental involvement activities/workshops throughout the school year will focus on their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaboration. Our timeline will encompass activities that will occur Monthly/Weekly/As Needed, from September 2018 – June 2019 through PTA meetings, parent events [such as Books & Breakfast, Morning Math, etc.],Second Cup of Coffee Parent Meeting, newsletters, Parent Engagement Tuesdays. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principals, coaches, teachers, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, SAVE room teacher, AIS team, 2018-19 CEP 24  SAT Family Worker, students [student-led demonstrations]. Topics will include but will not be limited CCLS ‘I can…’ Statement package/activities, Data/task/question analysis sharing, and subgroup-specific workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Work day schedule to allow 80 minutes of professional development on Mondays at least two times per month. Creative scheduling to accommodate inter-visitations. Funding for Coaches. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-year benchmark will be conducted in February, 2019. The mid-point benchmark will indicate that students have improved thier higher order thinking skills resulting in an increase in student ability to engage in thoughtful discourse as evident in a 5% increase in Teachers College Writing rubric scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that is used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark is the Teachers College Writing rubric scores. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To promote a culture for learning for all stakeholders, we reflected on previous years’ proceedings and continued those practices that were found to positively impact our school culture. All administrators in our school are supervisors as well as instructional leaders and communicate high expectations on an ongoing basis either via parent meetings, professional development workshops, memos, observation feedback, walk-throughs, etc. Strengths: The professional growth of teachers are addressed via Teacher Team meetings, Action Research teams, ongoing differentiated professional development and inter-visitations as a result of needs derived from sources such as observations, data, and/or professional requests. Needs: To continue building capacity and sharing expertise, Teacher Teams will focus on Domain 3 Instruction Components: (b) Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and (c) Engaging Students in Learning. Through these forums, teachers may gain information on how to better effectively deliver the instruction that will foster the higher order thinking skills needed for college, career and citizenship through quality questioning while deepening student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through coaching, Teacher Team meetings, lesson studies, action research and other professional development, 60% of teachers will be Effective or Highly Effective in quality questioning and student engagement as shown in Advance for Domain 3 Instruction Components: (b) Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and (c) Engaging Students in Learning. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers’ programs will include 40 minutes of common planning time weekly and common preps, 80 minutes every Monday and 35 minutes every Tuesday of collaborative planning professional development. To leverage teachers as leaders (Bambrick-Santoyo, 2012), Grade Leaders and Cluster Teacher Leaders will serve as facilitators. In grade teams, teachers will identify professional development needs obtained from data and inter-visitations. Specialists and coaches will work directly with our school’s Administration and Coaches to provide content specific professional development regarding subgroups as informed by data. Administration and/or Coaches will meet monthly with Grade Leaders and the Cluster Teacher Leader to collaboratively decide on grade-wide needs and cross grade needs. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities and ENLs will be embedded in all professional development . Instructional strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups would be extended time on task, differentiated instruction, visual aides, manipulatives, multi-media supports, etc. Parents will be encouraged to continuously participate in school-wide decision making by participating in the School Leadership Team meetings as an official member, or volunteer. The School Leadership Team will collaborate monthly to design the school’s comprehensive educational program. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Weekly, September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Administration, Coaches, Teachers Monthly, September 2018-June 2019 Borough Field Support Center, Administration, Coaches Parents Monthly, September 2018-June 2019 Leadership Team Members – Administration, Teachers, Parents) The school’s Professional Development Team will meet monthly to collectively differentiate and plan the professional development. This builds relationships, respect, and all parties value each others' input. Teachers, Administration Monthly, September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Coaches, and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 27  Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote teacher-parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home. Parental involvement activities/workshops throughout the school year will focus on their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote teacher-parent leadership. Our timeline will encompass activities that will occur Monthly/Weekly/As Needed, from September 2017 – June 2018 through PTA meetings, parent events, newsletters, and Parent Engagement Tuesdays. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principals, coaches, teachers, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, SAVE room teacher, AIS team, SAT Family Worker, students [student-led demonstrations], and School Leadership Team. Topics will include but will not be limited School Leadership, Social-Emotional topics, and student-led learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master schedule programming to allow common planning time for all teachers. borough field support center to provide professional development. Funding for Coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-year benchmark will be conducted in February, 2018. The mid-point benchmark that will indicate our school’s progress towards meeting this goal is 60% of teachers will be Effective or Highly Effective in quality questioning and student engagement as shown in Advance for Domain 3 Instruction Components: (b) Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and (c) Engaging Students in Learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that is used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark will be Advance teacher development and evaluation system for Domain 3 Instruction Components: (b) Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and (c) Engaging Students in Learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote teacher-parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home. We will offer parent driven parental involvement activities/workshops. Workshops throughout the school year will focus on their understanding of their child’s academic progress in reading and mathematics in order to promote teacher-parent leadership, increase parent involvement, and increase progress of all students. Our timeline will encompass activities that will occur Monthly/Weekly/As Needed, from September 2018 – June 2019 through workshops, activities PTA meetings, parent events, newsletters, and Parent Engagement Tuesdays. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principals, coaches, teachers, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, SAVE room teacher, AIS team, SAT Family Worker, BTG Social Worker, School Psychologist, students [student-led demonstrations], and School Leadership Team. Topics will include but will not be limited to academic progress in reading and mathematics, School Leadership, Social-Emotional topics, and student-led learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will offer a series of workshops to help parents understand their child’s academic progress in reading and mathematics, leading to increased opportunities for parent involvement as evident in a 65% or better NYC School Survey score for ‘Parent Involvement in School’. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Ongoing meetings will be held by the P.A., the Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Coaches, The School Leadership Team, Teachers, and Outside Organizations. Topics for these meetings that address this goal are the following: ELA instruction and methodologies, ELA test formats and expectations, Math and other content areas, Common Core Standards, Books and Breakfast, First Aid, Parent Partnership Program, and ENL classes offered five days per week (mornings and evenings). A daily outreach automated system will contact parents via phone to help monitor attendance and to provide announcements to all students. This system also allows us to send specific messages to parents of subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) . For example, if we we’re having a special meeting for parents of overage students, we can send out reminder messages to just those parents. Ongoing differentiated professional development will be provided to staff on how to increase parental involvement, focusing on how to compliment the instructional goals set for and by their child. Topics and strategies will be targeted for our parents of subgroups such as, but not limited to the following: using data to support instruction at home, setting goals, understanding and using rubrics to self-assess, and how to use on-line tutoring tools such as Mathletics and myOn. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, Community Members Monthly, September, 2018– June, 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Coaches Parents Monthly, September, 2018– June, 2019 Administration Parents Monthly, September, 2018-June, 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Teacher, and Coach Additional strategies and activities will be announced and or detailed in the monthly parent calendars and newsletters. The school also distributes a parent handbook that is translated in all the dominant languages. Parents, Students Parent-teacher conferences will be held periodically throughout the year to maintain a partnership and to discuss updates on their child’s progress. Every Tuesday from 2:20PM – 3:00PM teachers will focus on outreach and/or other ways to promote parent involvement and build trust. Parents Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Administration, Coaches, Teachers Monthly, September, 2018– June, 2019 Weekly, September, 2018– June, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 30  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Parent Involvement funding Funding for a Parent Coordinator Partnerships with outside organizations Books and other instructional material Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-year benchmark will be conducted in February, 2019. The mid-point benchmark that will indicate our school’s progress towards meeting this goal is a 65% or better NYC School Survey score for ‘Parent Involvement in School’. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark is teh NYC School Survey score for 'Parent Involvement in School'. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State ELA Data, MOSL Running Records, Performance Tasks, Unit Tests, Practice ELA Test, STAR Reading Mathematics State Math Data, Performance Tasks, Unit Tests, Practice Math Test, STAR Math Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Push-in/Pull-out Literacy Intervention Program, during the daily 120-minute literacy block. AIS Program during the daily 120-minute literacy block (Pull out model) – focusing on skill deficiencies. Response To Intervention (RTI) Program – Pull-out/Push-in model for Tier 2 and Tier 3 students. After school & Saturday Academywill offer additional targeted instruction to students in literacy beginning in October, 2018 to June, 2019. AIS services will be provided daily for targeted students via an online program, Mathletics. After-school and Saturday Academy will offer additional targeted instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one During the school day, before or after school. Small group and one-to-one During the school day, before or after school. 2018-19 CEP 32 Small group and one-to-one During the school day, before or after school. Small group and one-to-one During the school day, before or after school. One-to-one, Small group & whole group During the school day - daily Science Science State Data, Teacher Made Assessments Social Studies Passport Unit Assessments, Teacher Made Assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Anecdotals, AIS Team Recommendations, Formative and Summative Assessment Results, IEPs, OORS Incident Reports. to students in mathematics beginning in October, 2018 to April 2019. To reduce student to teacher ratio, teacher push-in model, pull-out, as well as a smaller class size model in literacy using science content will be implemented during the daily literacy block. To reduce student to teacher ratio, teacher push-in model, pull-out, as well as a smaller class size model in literacy using social studies content will be implemented during the daily literacy block. The guidance counselor (GC) will assess students support service needs of our students, target services to meet the needs of individual or groups of students and their families. In addition, they coordinate and plan preventative services and intervention programs and refer students and families as needed. The GC will provide substance and violence prevention program involving students, parent, staff members and the community, and 2018-19 CEP 33  provide age appropriate information and materials that focus on the promotion of “anti-drug” norms, and a drug-free school zone. The GC, Psychologist, Nurse, Special Needs Teachers, and Social Worker will collaborate with the school’s SAT to tailor personnel services to meet the needs of our educational community. The GC, Psychologist, Nurse, and Social Worker will collaborate in developing Individualized Education Plans with a focus on promoting parental involvement, creating student intervention plans and integrating school and community services. The GC will provide parent workshop and conduct parent meetings with a focus on strengthening the home-school relationship and increasing parent and community involvement The school psychologist will assess students support service needs of our students, target services to meet the needs of 2018-19 CEP 34  individual or groups of students and their families as needed. Additional At-Risk Services Open Airways Asthma Curriculum - Emotional, Health and Physical Components, Delivered by DOH School Nurse Referrals to Supportive Agencies Hygiene Classes AIDS Awareness Week and Curriculum lessons/Sex/Health Education Classes 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School Supplies - Book bags, Individual Libraries, writing utensils, etc. 72 students After School Programs BTG Social Worker Saturday Academy Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Principals in collaboration with Department of Education Liaisons work with the Division of Human Resources to identify qualified literacy teachers through major recruitment fairs and through relationships with Colleges and Universities. The pupil personnel secretary works closely with the borough field support HR point person to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. To attract highly qualified candidates to teach at PS 290, we invite them to visit the school and meet with current staff and administrators. Current staff share insights about the school and ‘advertise’ the positive aspects of working at and continuing to grow professionally at our school. Candidates are informed that provisions are made for a great deal of differentiated professional development. The prominence of clear expectations regarding teacher and student performance, as well as opportunities to actively contribute to their own professional growth and evaluation via the Teacher Performance Review process are other strategies which help us to attract highly qualified teachers. Principals in collaboration with Department of Education Liaisons work with the Division of Human Resources to identify qualified teachers through major recruitment fairs and through relationships with Colleges and Universities. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To maintain high quality teachers at PS 290, teachers are supported as they enhance their content knowledge and pedagogical skills. They fine tune their instructional skills and strengthen their professional practice through ongoing professional development via faculty conferences, study groups, professional development days, with the assistance of administrators, coaches, a mentor, and fellow colleagues. Mentors are assigned to support new and struggling teachers. P.S. 290 continues to target and assess pedagogical needs, and plan differentiated high quality professional development accordingly. All professional development is evaluated to determine its effectiveness in promoting high-quality instruction leading to improved student results. As highly qualified teachers participate in our professional community, we build capacity and improve in our expertise. Intentional reflection on the impact of instruction are the cornerstones of our efforts to ensure that all students receive instruction by highly qualified teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 CEP 38  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In order to assist preschool students with the transition to an elementary school program, we meet with the supervisor of the feeder day care and make arrangements for the parents to come to a special kindergarten orientation which focuses on curriculum, intervention services, routines of the school and visit the classrooms. In addition, parents have an opportunity to pose questions to the assistant principal and parent coordinator. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Decision-making is a collaborative effort that includes all stakeholders. Specifically, the MOSL team, consisting of half administrative staff, and half classroom teachers, decided the MOSL 20% local measure for the Advance evaluation system. Teachers also participate in teacher-made assessments throughout the year. Grade specific teacher data teams meet two times per month. These are grade specific, data driven teams (Cluster Teachers work with the grades they service). These teams work in 4-6 week cycles focusing on one goal per cycle. Each team works with flexible small targeted populations in areas of high need. By using the data from assessments, the team plans Common Core Standard driven instruction. These teams’ successful practices may be implemented grade-wide or school-wide. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 2018-19 CEP 39  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 452,722.00 119,741.00 14,414.00 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,439,319.00 x x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Part 4b, Section 5B Part 4b Section 5C Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5EPart 4b Section 5A Part 4b, Section 5C Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b, Section 5B Part 4b Section 5C Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5EPart 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 40  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 290, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 290 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Having students set goals for themselves in relationship to ELA and Math. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 290, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 46  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 47  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The direct instructional, supplemental program will be extending our After School programs. The major area of concern at P.S. 290 is the low academic achievement of some of our LEP students, as measured by results on State standardized assessments. A review of the State standardized assessments indicated that _55.0__% of students are performing at levels 1 and 2 in English Language Arts, and _61.0_% were performing at levels 1 and 2 on the State mathematics assessment. The academic performance of the Sub Group, English as a New Language Learners, is of particular concern, as this group represents a disproportionately high percentage of students performing at level 1 in both reading and mathematics. The Title III after school program will, therefore, focus on the areas of literacy and mathematics. Our school’s language instruction program for limited English proficient (LEP) students will mimic instruction taught during the course of the day. Specifically, the language of instruction for our after school program will be English and Spanish. There will be _7_ classes. The specific classes are the following: 1 Licensed Bilingual Teacher of Grade 2 - Room 301 - Students = 10 1 Licensed Common Branch teacher with Licensed ESL Teacher as Push-In - Grade 2 - Room 305 - Students = 15 1 Licensed Common Branch Teacher with Licensed ESL Teacher as Push-In - Grade 3 - Room 323 - Students = 15 1 Licensed Common Branch Teacher with Licensed ESL Teacher as Push-In - Grade 4 - Room 403 - Students = 12 1 Licensed Common Branch Teacher with Licensed ESL Teacher as Push-In - Grade 4 - Room 405 - Students = 15 1 Licensed common Branch Teacher with Licensed ESL Teacher as Push-In - Grade 5 - Room 419 - Students = 18 1 ESL Teacher as Push-In - Grades 4 & 5 - Room 411 - Students = 15 Home language support will be provided as material is sent home will be in both English and Spanish. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: The subgroup and grade levels are indicated above, specifically, the sub group is English Language Learners. LEP students are provided with after school academic services in grades 2-5. The program offers additional literacy and math instruction for targeted students. The ESL teacher will push-in 30 minutes into the classes to give support to the ELLs for the duration of the program. Teachers will work with small groups of targeted students to strengthen weak skills in both literacy and mathematics. This program is designed to remediate and enhance instruction that is given throughout the regular school day. For literacy, teachers and students, using an interactive model, will share literacy strategies, apply the skills to real text, respond to focused writing tasks and listen to stories for specific skill purposes. Students will be grouped based on assessed needs for additional instruction to improve literacy skills. Students throughout the grades will have access to books at both their instructional and independent levels. As students acquire more literacy strategies, the text materials will become increasingly more difficult. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule and duration: The Title III after school funded program is a program that will meet two times per week for two hours, per day, after school from September, 2018 through June, 2019. This program will begin in November and run until the end of April. The program will be on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20PM - 4:20PM. This will be in session for 16 weeks, which is approximately 34 sessions. How records are maintained: All records are maintained in the main office. Each teacher has a class list and attendance is taken on a daily basis. These attendance records and all notifications to parents regarding this After School program are maintained in the main office. Parents receive all notifications regarding After School in the parents' preferred language. Language of instruction: English and Spanish Number and types of certified teachers: ___1___ Bilingual Teacher, __1__ESL Teachers, _6__ Common Branch Teachers. All staff who service our LEP population are highly qualified and have all the necessary certification. Types of materials: With Title III funds in addition to other funds, the after school programs will purchase and use the following materials: Literacy - myOn on-line library program, News ELA and Time For Kids. For targeted math intervention the teachers are using May - to - May test prep, Go Math and Mathletics. Teacher created materials are also utilized. Materials that are distinct from those used for daily instruction that will be utilized for this program are the following: On line Read Works with Reading Passages, Engage New York Literacy and Math lessons, and coach created material that is targeted based on individual student needs as well as the needs of the grade. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: During school, and periodically after school, all teachers are given regular professional development to ensure that they are implementing best practices. Through study groups, grade conferences, and Monday professional development time, teachers are offered professional development opportunities through the duration of the programs. Professional development is coordinated by a Professional Development Team. This team provides a two-tier approach to staff development. On one level, they work with staff to strengthen their knowledge base in literacy, mathematics and other content areas. The second level, implemented concurrently, focuses on effective practices in the delivery of instruction. Professional development is provided via workshop model, through inter-visitations, modeling, and co-teaching. School based coaches, in literacy and in math, as well as support personnel from the District when necessary, will provide professional development and the necessary training to ensure quality instruction. Through feedback from observations, lesson study, and teacher team meeting, teachers' lessons are refined. Our ENL teachers also periodically attend outside professional development and then turnkey best practices. Our Monolingual/ENL/Bilingual Teachers, and Coaches, collaborate during Collaborative Planning time, to share best practices and meet the needs of our ELLs.Teachers to receive training: Intensive professional development is provided for all teachers. Training is in specialized strategies to meet the needs of ELLs, 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development bilingual, and special needs populations. We focus on the implementation of effective strategies for meeting the needs of the growing ELL population. Professional Development is differentiated by grade and teacher need. Professional Development is aligned to the instructional program being delivered during the instructional school day, after school, and Saturday programs. Professional development is ongoing and based on both hard and soft data. It will be at no cost to program.Schedule and duration: Professional development is provided throughout the school year (September, 2018 through June, 2019). There is also on-going articulation between the classroom teachers, cluster teachers, service providers and administrators. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT TOPICS MONTHS & DAYS TOTAL # OF SESSIONS DURATION OF SESSIONS PD PROVIDER NAMES & QUALIFICATIONS Common Core Learning Standards September 5, 2018 June 6, 2019 3 40 Minutes Each Principal – Ms. Newell APs – Ms. Haye & Ms. Crespo Literacy Coach – Ms. Neglia Math Coach – Ms. Ali Utilizing ELL Strategies During Instruction December 17, 2018 April 22, 2019 2 40 Minutes Each ESL Teacher – Mr. Blum ESL Teacher – Ms. Bialy Questioning & Discussion Techniques For GE, ELLs & SN Students November 7, 2017 February 5, 2018 2 40 Minutes Each Principal - Ms. Newell Coach - Ms. Neglia Professional Learning Cycle around the text: Thinking Through Quality Questioning Deepening Student Engagement October 29, 2018 November 6, 2018 December 17, 2018 January 7, 2019 4 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development 80 Minutes Each Principal - Ms. Newell Literacy Coach – Ms. Neglia IEP Teacher - Mr. O'Sullivan Literacy Implications for ENL Students January 7, 2019 February4, 2019 2 40 Minutes Each ULit Coach - Ms. Trim Individual Teacher & Grade Data Meetings & Goal Setting – Data Progress & Implications For Instruction for GE, ELLs & SN Students September – Beginning of Year Data January – Middle of Year Data May – End of Year Data 3 40 Minutes Each Principal – Ms. Newell AP – Ms. Haye AP – Ms. Crespo Literacy Coach – Ms. Neglia Math Coach – Ms. Ali New York State Testing Information November 6, 2018 March 18, 2018 2 40 Minutes Math Coach - Ms. Ali AP - Ms. Crespo SDI and UDL for GE, ELLs & SN Students November 19, 2018 January 14, 2019 2 IEP Teacher - Mr. O'Sullivan Special Needs Teacher - Ms. Henderson Using Formative Assessment To Improve Writing Instruction For GE, ELLs & SN Students December 10, 2018 2 40 Minutes Each Literacy Coach – Ms. Neglia 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development Professional Learning Cycle with PS 89: Supporting Rigorous Instruction for ELLs at Various Proficiency Levels in Grades 1-3 for ENL Teacher, ELLs & GE Teachers with ELL Students in classroom November 26, 2018 December 17, 2018 January 28, 2019 February 25, 2019 March 25, 2019 May 6, 2019 6 40 Minutes Each Brooklyn North - Ms. Lisa Weis Ongoing PD: The School Based Staff Development Committee includes the Principal (Ms. Newell), Assistant Principals (Ms. Haye and Ms. Crespo), UFT Chapter Leader (Dr. Byron Wilson), Literacy Coach (Ms. Neglia), Math Coach (Ms. Ali), and Teachers ( Ms. Klingler, Mr. O’Sullivan, Ms. Henderson, Ms. Gatto), who work together to combine ideas on effective planning for monolingual, bilingual, and ENL teachers, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assessing teachers’ needs for professional development. The PD team meets regularly to reflect and refine school-based practices and update the professional development plans. Pd is designed monthly and will be designed to include multiple sessions when applicable. Multiple sessions throughout the year focused on targeted topics related to the program will help with building teachers' capacity and professional knowledge base. The teacher will receive this ongoing related PD via the 80 minutes on Mondays, and during common preps during the week.Impact: PD will positively impact the progress of ELLs because all PD provided at PS 290 include modifications and accommodations that will benefit ELL students. PD is based on the needs of the students as determined by data collected at the classroom and school level. PD at PS 290 is also differentiated by the specific needs of the teachers. Teachers of bilingual students and teachers of ELLs have common planning time during which they can collaborate and share best practices. Teachers can request PD workshops by speaking to a School Based Staff Development Team member as well. By focusing our PD on the data and its connection to our school wide goals, we can meet the needs of our ELLs. Records: At each workshop and meeting, the provider creates an agenda and teachers sign in to indicate attendance. These records are maintained in the Principal's office. Impact: PD will positively impact the progress of ELLs because all PD provided at PS 290 include modifications and accommodations that will benefit ELL students. PD is based on the needs of the students as determined by data collected at the classroom and school level. PD at PS 290 is also differentiated by the specific needs of the teachers. Teachers of bilingual students and teachers of ELLs have common planning time during which they can collaborate and share best practices. Teachers can request PD workshops by speaking to a PD team member as well. By focusing our PD on the data and its connection to our school wide goals, we can meet the needs of our ELLs. Records: At each workshop and meeting, the provider creates an agenda and teachers sign in to indicate attendance. These records are maintained in the Principal's office. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Here at PS 290, ongoing efforts are employed to increase parental involvement by working with the Parent Teacher Association and our parent coordinator. We offer workshops and programs to not only keep parents informed, but to engage families in instructional programs that would help them best support their children. All activities are designed to increase parental involvement, which in turn will have an impact on student academic achievement. There are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet our parents' needs. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: Parent engagement time every Tuesday, at least four open school teacher with parent meetings, monthly activities such as Character Day, Parent ENL Courses, Parent Fitness Program, Parent Book Club, PTA Meetings, Leadership Team Meetings, Coffee with the Principal, Dial-A-Teacher, Mother/Child Dinner/Breakfast, Father/Child Dinner/Breakfast, Parent Nutrition Cornell University Extension, Learning Walks, Family Movie Nights, Pajama Night, Arts & Crafts, PPT/AIS/LRE Intervention Meetings, Morning Math, and Academic Workshops on Multiple Topics, Social-Emotional Help, Trips, and Celebratory Events.Schedule and duration: Workshops, meetings, and activities for parental involvement are conducted throughout the year, September through June.Maintenance of Records: All records are maintained in room 115. This includes agendas, workshop attendance sheets and invitations in the parents' preferred language.Translation Needs: The translation needs of parents are met via providing all notifications of events in the parents' preferred language. Also, all workshops have a translator to translate verbal information.Topic to be covered: We have a full-time ENL day and evening program. Topics for these meetings include, but are not limited to Common Core Learning Standards, Go Math, ELA and math instruction and methodologies, ELA and math test formats and expectations, etc. During other parent meetings and workshops we cover topics including, but not limited to the following: Readygen, Go Math, myOn, Mathletics, Testing, Book Reading Strategies, Math Games, Nutrition, IEP parent workshops, and Literature Circles. Tentative Schedule of Topics/Activities: Teacher with Parent Meetings Daily As per teacher’s prep schedule September – June Administrators, Coaches, and Teachers Open House - For Parents of GE, ELLs, and SN September 17, 2018 4:30PM – 7:30PM Administrators, Coaches, and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 55  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parent Title I Meeting September 15, 2018 8:15AM – 10:15AM PTA & Administrators ELL Parent Orientation September 27, 2018 8:15AM – 10:15AM ESL Teachers, Administrators Character Day Books and Breakfast October 31, 2018 8:15AM-10:15AM Administrators, Coaches, and Teachers Parent ESL Courses Tues. –Thurs. 5:45PM-9:00PM Adult Education Representative Parent Fitness Program September – June 2:30PM - 4:30PM Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Parent Book Club October – June 8:15AM Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Parent Workshop Series Topics: Attendance, Homework Help September – June 8:15AM Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Parent Association Meetings Topics: State Standards - ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies Monthly September – June Alternating AM & PM PTA with School Staff Leadership Team Meetings Mondays – Monthly September – June 3:00PM – 6:00PM 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Mr. O’Sullivan Mother/Child Dinner/Breakfast Annually May 5:00PM – 7:00PM or 8:15AM PTA and Ms. Newell Father/Child Dinner/Breakfast Annually June 5:00PM – 7:00PM or 8:15AM PTA and Ms. Newell Parent Nutrition Classes See Monthly Schedule 8:15AM – 10:15AM September – June Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator ELL Progress Meetings With Parents of ELLs November 15, 2018 March 15, 2019 May 23, 2019 12:20PM - 2:20PM & 4:30PM - 7:30PM Parent Association & Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Family Movie Nights Topic: Periodically 7:00PM – 9:00PM September – June PTA and Parent Coordinator Pajama Night Periodically 7:00PM – 9:00PM September – June PTA and Parent Coordinator Open House Annually 4:00PM – 5:30PM September Ms. Newell Open School As per Chancellor’s Schedule AM and PM September – June Ms. Newell Arts & Crafts Three times per year 2018-19 CEP 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 8:15AM – 10:15AM September – June Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Intervention Meetings Scheduled monthly as needed September – June Ms. Dorcent Intervention Coordinator Morning Math Annually 8:15AM – 9:30AM December Administrators, Coaches, and Teachers Learning Walks - Topics: Healthy Activities = Healthy Child Annually Daily September – June Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Academic Workshops on Multiple Topics, Trips, and Celebratory Events See Monthly Schedule 8:15AM-10:15AM September – June Administrators, Coaches, and Teachers Team “Student” Meetings Every Wednesday (Individually Scheduled) September - June Parents, Administrators, & Coaches ELL Parent Meeting May 22, 2019 8:15AM – 10:15AM ESL Teachers, Administrators Name of provider: There are ongoing meetings held by the Parent Association, Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Coaches, The School Leadership Team, Teachers, and Outside Organizations. Several staff members are bilingual and all meetings are conducted in both English and Spanish. These meetings are at no cost to the program. How parents will be notified of these activities: Information is disseminated via monthly parent calendars and newsletters. We also have a daily outreach automated system that contacts parents via phone. Parent-teacher conferences are held periodically throughout the year to maintain a partnership and maintain communication. The Parent Coordinator maintains a parent resource center that contains updated and translated information regarding all upcoming events. At each activity or event, parents are notified of other upcoming events and activities. Many parents have also signed up for the Remind app, which allows the school to remind parents of upcoming meetings and events. 2018-19 CEP 58 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Juan Morel Campos Borough Brooklyn School Number 290 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Brigitte Newell Coach Mrs. Jessica Neglia ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Joshua Blum Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Julia Bialy, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Marilyn Martinez, Bilingua Related-Service Provider Ananie Simeon Superintendent Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Assistant Principal Ms. Miriam Crespo Coach Ms. Ameera Ali School Counselor Ms. Lydia Roman Parent Nalini Ishmael Parent Coordinator Mrs. Leonor Roldan Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 497 Total number of ELLs 114 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.94% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 1 3 0 2 1 4 0 K 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 0 1 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Some of the assessment tools our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs are as follows: Fountas and Pinnell As part of the Periodic Assessment Program, our students are assessed using the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. Fountas and Pinnell, Running Records, are used to test students' reading fluency and comprehension. These assessments are done one-on-one and at least two times per year. NYSITELL The New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL), is a test that provides insight into students' 2018-19 CEP 61  English proficiency level. Those children that score below proficiency on the NYSITELL become eligible for state-mandated services for ELLs. The NYSITELL has eight levels: Level I includes sub tests of Listening and Speaking. At the remaining levels, the test includes Listening, Reading, Writing, and Speaking. Our school only administer up to level VI as we only house up to grade five students. The NYSITELL is both a group and individually administered test, depending on the sub test and level. Speaking is individually administered for all levels. Sub tests for all levels are derived from NYS and ENL learning standards. The Reading sub test asks students to answer questions about stories printed in their test books. The Writing sub test asks students to write and perform writing exercises in response to questions and stimuli in their test books. The Listening sub test asks students to select the correct response to a picture and/or dictated word or statement. The Speaking sub test asks students to respond to a dictated word or statement which sometimes refers to a picture. The number of items varies by level. Implications from this data are used in tailoring early literacy skills instruction. NYSESLAT The NYSESLAT assessments reflect the New York State Learning Standards for English as a New Language. The language modalities assessed at each grade level, include: • Listening • Reading • Speaking • Writing The test has been adapted for the 2018-2019 school year in order to incorporate all modalities on each day of testing. Additionally, tasks have been aligned to the common core standards and are interrelated in regards to the academic subject matter each modality draws upon. Listening For grades K-4, the students answer questions based on pictures and photographs. Students are also asked to choose pictorial answers in response to brief oral questions as well as short stories. This is delivered by pedagogues for grades K-1 and presented in a pre-recorded tape for grades 2-4. The short stories, poems, and rhymes are said twice. For grades 5-12, the Listening assessments present four types of listening activities on a pre-recorded tape. The short and extended conversations are stated twice. • In the first, students look at photographs while they listen to four statements, only one of which accurately describes what the photograph shows. The statements are said only once. • In the second, students listen for details in brief, everyday conversation. • In the third, students answer questions based on what is said or implied in conversations about everyday topics. • In the fourth, students respond to questions based on conversations about general and academic subjects. Reading The teacher reads a script to guide students through the K-1 reading assessment. Tasks range from identification of letters and sounds to choosing answers to questions about stories of a few sentences. Each reading assessment (Grades 2-12) contains reading passages with multiple-choice questions. • The passages offer a range of content that includes everyday topics and language; examples of social communication; literature texts for children; texts based on maps, charts, schedules, and calendars; and other academic subject matter. • The multiple-choice questions assess cognitive and analytical proficiencies stressed in the standards. The questions focus on main ideas, facts, inferences, vocabulary, sequences of events, interpretation of non-fiction and literary texts, and social communication. 2018-19 CEP 62  Speaking Students will demonstrate their command of spoken English for everyday and academic purposes. • In grades K-4, some descriptive tasks are based on picture stimuli. • In grades 5-12, students are asked to perform a variety of cognitive tasks, such as: narrating a brief story based on a picture sequence, making predictions based on given stimuli, explaining a situation based on personal experience, giving directions to describe a process, expressing an opinion and/or persuading an audience, and interpreting visual material such as a graph, chart, or diagram. Writing The K-1 writing assessment is designed to measure how well a student writes letters, words, and simple sentences in English. The assessment presents three kinds of tasks: • writing single dictated words • writing short dictated sentences • writing a short description of a picture printed in the student's test book. Each writing assessment (Grades 2-5) presents three exercises: pre-writing, writing an essay or story; and editing. The students perform and are evaluated on different parts of “The Writing Process” as indicated in the New York State Learning Standards for English as a Second Language. Upon analyzing the four modalities being tested (listening, speaking, reading, and writing), it was found that the speaking score was the highest. Listening was higher that reading and writing, but the writing score was marginally the lowest of all the modalities. The data from the NYSESLAT provides insight and implications for the school’s LAP and instruction. We must continue emphasizing the writing component using critical-thinking graphic organizers. This will continue to be fully implemented and integrated within the Writer’s workshop to support students' growth in writing skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures we have in place to support these efforts are a trained staff of pedagogues and coaches who regularly attend professional developments and workshops to continuously advance educational approach and awareness of evaulatory and curricular acumen. Data teams in which foci for analysis in all modalities across all content areas are ongoing weekly and the findings are implemented into adjusted strategy and approach within curriculum. Moreover, ELLs are often within small cohorts of push-in pull-out instruction and thus can receive particularly individualized and differentiated instruction guided by very meticulous knowledge and study of the individual both interpersonally and through data assessment. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school evaluates the success of our programs for ELLs by analyzing hard and soft data. Examples of these data include, but are not limited to: NYSESLAT at the end of the school year, NYSITELL within the first 10 days of entrance, ELA once a year, Fountas & Pinnell, practice exams, ReadyGen Assessments, daily evaluations through classroom monitoring, ongoing informal assessment, unit tests, mid-year tests, portfolios, and writing samples. We evaluate the programs by reviewing our AYP data. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Regular communication is maintained with family through weekly parent engagement hours and a channel of joint commitment both through classroom teachers and service providers is fostered through grade leader sessions, data teams, and workshops. Evaluations are recommended when deemed necessary and any outreach to school psychology team as well. All members of school team are highly skilled pedagogues trained to guide instruction through the interpolation of data as well as through an understanding of the ELL mind. Professional developments to foster this are ongoing and outreach to parents to best help them understand their children's needs, growths, areas of strengths, weaknesses and what they can do to help and maintain L1 proficiency is ongoing. 2018-19 CEP 63  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This team focuses on literacy and is comprised of teachers, administration, coaches, and a mentor. This team will use a screening assessment (such as running records) to determine which students in grades K-5 may be “at risk” for not meeting grade-level standards. These students are grouped into Tiers 1, 2, or 3. Students whose assessment scores fall below a certain score or benchmark are identified as needing additional academic interventions, Tiers 2 and 3, are provided additional services beyond the initial 90 minutes of the literacy block. These students are progress monitored using other assessments (e.g. STAR Reading, etc.) to track progress. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns indicate that students who enter in Kindergarten, as demonstrated by the NYSITELL, are stronger in speaking and listening skills. The NYSESLAT indicates that speaking and listening skills are stronger than reading and writing skills across the grades. For grades K-2, writing is initially stronger than reading, but the reading scores show improvement as the grades get higher. The levels of proficiency improve through the years, from beginning – to intermediate – to advanced, with more advanced students in the upper grades, 4th and 5th. Students become stronger readers, however, their writing takes longer to develop. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The two ENL pedagogues regularly assess through the ELL data analysis tool and personal study/work with ENL cohort. Such findings are then used to then inform or guide instruction accordingly and outline to parents the correlations in data with instructional planning and how this aims to foster their child's growth. In testing grades, the findings from those scores will often determine placement in pull-out or small group push-in for extra support in according subjects. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered through the Transitional Bilingual Education model and the Push-in/Pull-out model. a. All Transitional Bilingual Education classes are self-contained with content area and Native Language Arts instruction delivered on a sliding scale in both native and English language, i.e. first year students receive 60% of instruction in their native language and 40% in English, and receive less native language support as their English proficiency improves. ENL students are also self-contained for grades K-5 with ENL language and content instruction through the Push-in/Pull-out model. Push-in involves teaching in whole class, co-teaching, and small group capacities as per curriculum design and student need as developed between the ENL and classroom teacher. Pull-out involves the facilitation of English language acquisition for students with higher needs, i.e. newcomers and at-risk students through small group instruction. Instruction is given in English, however, translation, if possible, may be utilized to clarify concepts. b. TBE program. If applicable. homogeneously b. Program models in each grade are heterogeneous for the classroom as a whole, e.g. a newcomer student may be in 2018-19 CEP 64  the same class as an advanced ELL. When pushing in/pulling out for small group instruction, however, students are grouped fairly homogeneously to foster solidarity and unify objectives. Some Pull-out groups may be heterogeneously mixed by grade level if they have similar needs, e.g. fourth and fifth grade newcomers may be grouped together. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model by holding ENL teacher and classroom teacher scheduling meetings in the beginning of the year. a. As per CR Part 154, all ELLs in both TBE and ENL programs receive ENL instruction. ELLs at the entering through emerging level of English proficiency receive at minimum 360 instructional minutes of ENL per week and students at the intermediate through expanding level of English proficiency receive at minimum180 instructional minutes of ENL per week. Those students at Proficient/Commanding receive continued services of 90 minutes per week. Breakdown of minutes in stand-alone ENL ensures that Entering students receive at minimum 180 minutes/1 unit of study ENL per week, and emerging at minimum 90 minutes/5 unit of study ENL per week. These students also receive additional service through all content areas in order to fulfill the total 360 minutes. Students at the levels of transitioning through commanding, as well as those scoring proficient within the past two years, will receive their respective 180 and 90 minutes through a combination of the content areas. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Student’s native language skills are being used for instructional purposes in the following way: Native Language Arts is aligned with the Common Core State’s Standards and is given daily in the TBE model. As stated earlier, content for ESL classes is delivered strictly in English unless clarification is required and can be given in a child’s native language. In the TBE model, content area instruction (e.g., Science, Math, Social Studies) is given in the native language. Native language instruction, as research data indicates, supports, and facilitates second language acquisition. ENL methodologies, student’s home language, visuals, manipulatives, media, cooperative learning strategies, scaffolding, graphic organizers, close reading activities, turn-and-talk, think-pair-share, popcorn, reader's theater, buddy reading, choral reading, questioning, predicting, making inferences, brainstorming, listening activities, and Total Physical Response are used as a support when needed to clarify concepts, make content comprehensible, and to enrich language development. Language instruction is clearly aligned to ENL, ELA, and NLA standards. Our Transitional Bilingual Education program follows the mandates of CR Part 154 and is composed of self-contained bilingual classes from Kindergarten to fifth grade. Initially, we follow the 60/40 model that is 60% Spanish and 40% English. Gradually, the English language instruction increases as the student develops English fluency. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to evaluate ELLs in their native language, Bilingual classroom teachers use STAR Reading Spanish, STAR Math Spanish and teacher made assessments as diagnostic and formative assessments. In addition, regular formative assessments in mathematics are made with Envision Mathematics. Formal assessments with teacher made materials are made in NLA and mathematics several times a month. SOLOM is used regularly for informal evaluations and from K-2 SOPA is also used formally. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 2018-19 CEP 65  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction for ELL subgroups is differentiated according to NYSELAT score, grade level, informal and formal assessments. The classroom teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to further tailor instruction according to students' needs. a. SIFE students get support through Academic Intervention Services and small group instruction. Push-in teachers provide additional services in the morning and throughout the day. One – to – one and peer assistance is offered, and during Literacy and Math Block students are mainstreamed according to their performance level. b. Newcomers receive differentiated instruction according to their English proficiency level. In addition, they are given daily instruction in a small group setting by the ENL teachers, and lessons are tailored towards skills needed to take the NYSESLAT exam. They also receive peer assistance. c. ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years are placed in a reduced size classroom. They receive support through Academic Intervention Services and one – to – one professional period tutoring by the classroom teacher and/or paraprofessional. They are also mainstreamed during the literacy and math block. Ms. Dorcent, the Academic Intervention Teacher, designs lessons to differentiate instruction during school, and meets with parents and teachers to discuss students’ progress and next steps. d. Long-term ELLs - N/A e. ELLs who score proficiently on the NYSESLAT will continue to receive services from an ELL pedagogue for one year afterwards. Depending on parent preference, proficient ELLs can be placed in the ENL classroom or transitioned to a non-ENL classroom for the following year; classroom teachers are advised of their former ELL status once placed in this environment. These ELLs are given instruction through ENL methodology just as they were in years past and receive at least 45 minutes of ELA from an ENL pedagogue per week. In addition some may be placed in enrichment programs for extended day. We offer transitional instruction for students reading at proficiency or who have scored out of the NYSESLAT by providing two years of extended time accommodations for state-wide assessments, small group instruction during the literacy block, and up to two additional years of ENL support through the content areas. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use myriad instructional strategies such as comprehensible input, differentiation lessons to the multiple intelligences, modifying vocabulary, linking new information to prior knowledge, cooperative learning, modifying testing and homework, etc. The grade level materials are common core aligned and developed specifically for each grade - Ready Gen Literacy, GoMath, and Wilson Fundations. Lessons are adapted using the former instructional strategies whilst regularly employing Smartboard and ipad technology, so we may foster the acceleration of English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school differentiates instruction and curriculum as per students' needs. Meetings between ENL teachers, bilingual teachers, classroom teachers, and related services providers are coordinated to ensure ELL-SWDs receive mandated instruction within the least restrictive environment. Our school ensures that flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers by creating blocks of instruction that are held during the day at the same time. Specifically, we have a 120-minute literacy block where the entire school does literacy at the same time. This programming creates the opportunity for mainstreaming students to spend time with non-disabled peers. On selected grades there are also math blocks to create mainstream opportunities. Through creative programming, we were able to have each grade have at least two common preps. This creates opportunity for schedules to be aligned and similar, so that time spent with non-disabled peer is maximized during other content areas and the Arts. On each grade level we have an ICT classroom. If an ELL has an IEP that dictates ICT instruction, he/she is placed within this setting. 2018-19 CEP 66  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs are as follows: ELA: Placement in Reduced Size Class (Levels 1 and 2, including ELLs, beginner, intermediate, and advanced) • Reduced Student-Teacher Ratio Enabling Small Group instruction • Individualized Instruction Based on Assessed Needs. • Grades K-5 (20-27 students, where possible) • Daily throughout school year during the school day Extended Block (General Ed., Special Ed., ELLs – beginner, intermediate, advanced, and SIFE in English and Spanish) • Small Group Instruction Based on Needs (Levels 1 and 2) • Extended Time on Tasks • Grades K-5 - (70 minutes ELA grades K through 2, 75 minutes ELA grades 3 through 5 ) • Daily throughout the school year during the school day Push-In/Pull-Out and AIS Teacher (Levels 1 and 2, including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and SIFE) • In identified classes grades K-5 • Reduced Student-Teacher Ratio enabling small group instruction • Individualized instruction based on assessed needs. • Small Group Instruction based on needs (Levels 1 and 2) • Frequency according to need during the school day ReadyGen Intervention (ELLs – beginner, intermediate and Sp. Ed.) • Grades K-3 • Paraprofessional/Push-in Teachers Support-Based on Need • 40 Minutes Daily • Identified by Running Records • Small Group Instruction • Monitoring of Student Progress-STAR Assessment-during the school day Paraprofessional Tutoring in English and Spanish for ELLs – beginner and intermediate • Tutoring during class instruction in grades K, 2, 3, 4, 5 • Small group and individualized tutoring • Frequency according to need during the school day Summer In the City -Grades 2-5 (Levels 1, ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced, General Ed., Special Ed. ) • Small Group Instruction • Frequency Based on Assessed Needs IEP Teacher • Supporting At Risk Students (including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced) • Small Group Instruction • Frequency Based on Assessed Needs Teacher Supervised Peer Assistance • Students at risk of failing required courses (including ELLs – beginner and intermediate) • Student Progress Monitored 2018-19 CEP 67  • Before School, After School, or During Lunch Period Professional Period Tutoring • Small group instruction (including ELLS - beginner, intermediate, and SIFE) • All teachers • Grades K-5 • At least one time per week Mathematics: Extended Mathematics Block in English and Spanish (Levels 1 and 2) (General Ed., Special Ed., and ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced) • Small Group Instruction Based on Needs • Extended Time on Tasks • Grades K-5 • Daily throughout the school year Placement in Reduced Size Class (Levels 1 and 2, including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced) • Reduced Student-Teacher Ratio Enabling Small Groups • Individualized Instruction in English and Spanish based on assessed needs • Grades K-5 (20-27 students, where possible) • Daily throughout school year Paraprofessional Tutoring in English and Spanish for ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced • Tutoring during class instruction • Small group and individual • Frequency according to need Summer in the City and Summer Title III Program - Grades 2-5 (ELLs - beginner, intermediate, and advanced, General Ed., Special Ed.) • Small Group Instruction in English and Spanish • Frequency Based on Assessed Needs IEP Teacher • Supporting At Risk Students (including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced) • Small Group Instruction in English and Spanish • Frequency based on assessed needs Teacher Supervised Peer Assistance in English and Spanish • Students at risk of failing required courses (including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and SIFE) • Student’s Progress Monitored • Before School, After School, or During Lunch Period Professional Period Tutoring in English and Spanish for ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and advanced • Small group instruction • All teachers • Grades K-5 • At least one time per week Science: Teacher Supervised Peer Assistance in English and Spanish for grade 4 • Students at risk of failing required courses (including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and SIFE) 2018-19 CEP 68  • Student’s Progress Monitored • Before School, After School, or During Lunch Period Professional Period Tutoring for ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and SIFE • Small group instruction in English and Spanish • All teachers • Grades K-5 • At least one time per week Social Studies: Teacher Supervised Peer Assistance in English and Spanish for grade 5 • Students at risk of failing required courses (including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and SIFE) • Students’ Progress Monitored • Before School, After School, or During Lunch Period Push-In Teacher (Levels 1 and 2, including ELLs – beginner, intermediate, SIFE, and Sp. Ed. in 4th and 5th grade) • Reduced Student-Teacher Ratio enabling small group and individualized instruction in English and Spanish based on assessed need • Small Group Instruction based on needs (Levels 1 and 2) • Frequency according to need Professional Period Tutoring for ELLs – beginner, intermediate, and SIFE • Small group instruction in English and Spanish • All teachers • Grades K-5 • At least one time per week 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs and plans for improvement will include: Academic Intervention Services After School Program Extended day enrichment programs 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We plan to continue all current programs/services for ELLS. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs by taking part in the following: Peer assistance - academic intervention AIS - academic intervention provided by Ms. Dorcent Push-in/Pull-out instruction daily Special Needs Services (as per IEP): Speech (mono. & bil.), Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, SETSS Translations Services provided as needed All written communications are translated for accessibility At-risk Services Provided by the Guidance Counselor: Guidance Counselor Intervention • Group and Individual Counseling • ELL counseling services 2018-19 CEP 69  • Needs Based • Students not Meeting Promotional / Performance Standards • Students Experiencing Behavioral / Emotional / Family Issues Negatively Impacting on Learning • Referrals to Supportive Agencies Alternative Instruction Suspension Program (SAVE Room) • All Levels of Suspension • Uninterrupted Academic Instructional Support • Frequency Based on Needs • Counseling Provided • Outreach Services • Reduced Student-Teacher Ratio enabling small group and individualized instruction based on assessed needs. • Referrals to Support Agencies At-risk Services Provided by the School Psychologist (English and Spanish) • Frequency according to need • Counseling • Referrals to outside agencies At-risk Services Provided by the Social Worker/Family Worker: • Social Worker Intervention • Group and Individual Counseling • ELL interpretation services • Crisis Intervention • Students/families Experiencing Behavioral / Emotional / Family Issues Negatively Impacting on Learning • Referrals to Supportive Agencies Attendance Intervention • Monitor Attendance of At Risk Students (Less than 90% attendance) • Conducts Needed Outreach Services • Family Counseling • Attendance Teacher at Every School • Attendance Coordinator at Every District • Referrals to Supportive Agencies At-risk Health/Special Needs-related Services: Health Services • Regional Nursing Director- Coordinates Services Throughout Region • Supervising Nurse for Each District- Monitors Services • Contract or DOH Nursing Services Support All Elementary Schools @ 6hrs /day • Public Health Advisor for Each Middle School @ 7hrs/day • Trained Health Aide in Each High School • Monitor Health Needs of All Students • Provide First Aid • Referrals to Supportive Agencies • Defibrillator and trained personnel Open Airways Asthma Curriculum • Emotional, Health and Physical Components • Delivered by DOH School Nurse 2018-19 CEP 70  • Small Group Instruction • Referrals to Supportive Agencies 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are supported through the use of various instructional materials and resources such as: Technology: . SMART Board . First Thousand Words Software . Brainpop.com . Computers . Myon .Duolingo.com .abcmouse . Videos . Audio equipment (e.g., listening tapes, CDs) . Manipulatives . Starfall.com . Thinkfinity.com . Leapfrog . IRead . Read 180 . System 44 . Mathletics Literacy: . Word builders . Reading Rods . Bilingual Picture cards . Bilingual Guided reading texts . Bilingual Libraries . Manipulatives . Letter blocks . Spotlight on English . Readygen . Wilson Phonics . Letter blocks . Alphabet tubs . Reader's Theater . Teacher's College Units of Study - Writing Math: . Go Math software and activities . Manipulatives . Math Tools Science: . Harcourt Science (English and Spanish) . Amplify Science (English and Spanish) Grades 3 and 4 2018-19 CEP 71  . Manipulatives . Science Tools and Equipment . Libraries Social Studies: . Passport Social Studies texts and interactive activities . National Geographic Textbooks . Libraries . Maps and Globes In addition to the above, the following subgroups use: SIFE – listening tapes, reading rods, picture cards, starfall.com, leapfrog, Spotlight on English, handwriting and other writing conventions activities, SMART board, alphabet tubs, ELL intervention kits, Spelling Connections, bilingual dictionaries Newcomers – listening tapes, reading rods, picture cards, starfall.com, leapfrog, Spotlight on English, handwriting and other writing conventions activities, SMART board, alphabet tubs, Spelling Connections, bilingual dictionaries ELLs receiving service 4-6 years – dialogue journals, reader’s theater, graphic organizers, SMART board, Keep On Reading, Read, Write, Edit & Listen, Comprehension Connections ELLs identified as having special needs – Wilson Phonics, Fundations, Harcourt Elements of Reading, System 44, and Read180 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in each program model as per program design, i.e., TBE uses BiLiteracy Pathways which are Spanish literacy programs aligned with the English literacy program, Readygen. Guided bilingual texts and musical CDs accompany programs to deliver native language arts instruction. Native language is supported through ENL by the use of translation services through bilingual dictionaries when deemed necessary, bilingual texts, cognate studies, and Spelling Connections. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support and resources are tailored to ELLs ages and grade levels and based on formal and informal assessment. All ESL students have the support of their teachers, administration, and the following staff members: Guidance Counselor: • Group and Individual Counseling • ELL counseling services • Needs Based • Students not Meeting Promotional / Performance Standards • Students Experiencing Behavioral / Emotional / Family Issues Negatively Impacting on Learning • Referrals to Supportive Agencies School Psychologist: • Frequency according to need • ELL interpretation services • Counseling • Referrals to outside agencies Social Worker/Family Worker: • Social Worker Intervention • Group and Individual Counseling • ELL interpretation services • Crisis Intervention • Students/families Experiencing Behavioral / Emotional / Family Issues Negatively Impacting on Learning • Referrals to Supportive Agencies 2018-19 CEP 72  Parent Coordinator: • Liaison between parents and school thus facilitating a home-school relationship • Provides translation services, both written and oral, to ensure effective communication • Provides workshops, meetings, and school-wide activities to encourage parental/community involvement • Coordinates the Parent-Volunteer Program in order to encourage parents to take an active role in school proceedings 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs are supported through the use of various instructional materials and resources such as: Technology: . SMART Board . First Thousand Words Software . Brainpop.com . Computers . Myon .Duolingo.com .abcmouse . Videos . Audio equipment (e.g., listening tapes, CDs) . Manipulatives . Starfall.com . Thinkfinity.com . Leapfrog . IRead . Read180 . System 44 Literacy: . Word builders . Reading Rods . Bilingual Picture cards . Bilingual Guided reading texts . Bilingual Libraries . Manipulatives . Letter blocks . Spotlight on English . Readygen . Wilson Phonics . Letter blocks . Alphabet tubs . Reader's Theater Math: . Go Math software and activities . Manipulatives . Math Tools Science: . Harcourt Science (English and Spanish) 2018-19 CEP 73  . Amplify Science (English and Spanish) Grades 3 and 4 . Manipulatives . Science Tools and Equipment . Libraries Social Studies: . Passport Social Studies texts and interactive activities . National Geographic Textbooks . Libraries . Maps and Globes In addition to the above, the following subgroups use: SIFE – listening tapes, reading rods, picture cards, starfall.com, leapfrog, Spotlight on English, handwriting and other writing conventions activities, SMART board, alphabet tubs, ELL intervention kits, Spelling Connections, bilingual dictionaries Newcomers – listening tapes, reading rods, picture cards, starfall.com, leapfrog, Spotlight on English, handwriting and other writing conventions activities, SMART board, alphabet tubs, Spelling Connections, bilingual dictionaries ELLs receiving service 4-6 years – dialogue journals, reader’s theater, graphic organizers, SMART board, Keep On Reading, Read, Write, Edit & Listen, Comprehension Connections ELLs identified as having special needs – Wilson Phonics, Fundatioins, Harcourt Elements of Reading, System 44, and Read180 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, summer reading lists and informational packets are sent to parents' homes, individual informal assessments are conducted, parent orientation meetings are held, and the Parent Coordinator reaches out to the parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Monthly ENL teacher professional development are facilitated by the Network specialist. Teachers discuss current research, best practices, materials, NYS-ENL standards, Common Core standards, instructional strategies and alignment to core 2018-19 CEP 74  curriculum. All staff members, including assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, social workers, and parent coordinator attend professional development which is coordinated by a School Based Staff Development Committee, that includes the Principal, Assistant Principals, UFT Chapter Leader, Staff Developer, Literacy Coach, Reading Universal Literacy Coach, Math Coach, and Teachers, who work together to combine ideas on effective planning for teachers, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assessing teachers’ needs for professional development. The team meets regularly to reflect and refine school-based practices and up-date the professional development plans. This team provides a two-tier approach to staff development. On one level, they work with staff to strengthen their knowledge base in literacy, mathematics and other content areas. The second level, implemented concurrently, focuses on effective practices in the delivery of instruction. Most professional development is delivered in the teacher’s classroom. Particular emphasis is being placed on the reading programs. School based coaches, in literacy and in math, and support personnel from the Network will provide professional development. In-house component meetings focus on various aspects of instructional methods and strategies. Through feedback from observations, modeling and opportunities for inter-visitations, teachers’ skills are refined. In addition, staff development for the State Standards and Common Core Standards for English Language Arts is provided during the school day as well as after school. Literacy, Math, Science, Social Studies, bilingual studies, and Technology instruction are supported by on-site staff members. Throughout the school year, there are ongoing share-sessions between the classroom teachers, cluster teachers, service providers and administrators. Grade conferences, workshops, study groups, share sessions, and team meetings are held to help improve student achievement in English Language, Mathematics, and other Content Areas using ENL strategies to meet the New York State and the Common Core Performance standards. Intensive professional development is provided for teachers in specialized strategies to meet the needs of special populations; and implementation of effective strategies for meeting the needs of the growing ELL population. Professional Development is differentiated by grade and teacher need. Professional Development is ongoing and based on both hard and soft data. Sample topics addressed during professional development includes but is not limited to the following: Literacy: Guided Reading (Grades K-5) Critical thinking graphic organizers Reading Academy BiLiteracy Pathways Ready Gen STAR Assessment (Reading and Math) Preparation for ELA Native Language Arts Standards Fountas and Pinnell Running Records Data analysis and implications for instruction Teacher's College Writing Process Mathematics: Go Math math exemplars STAR Math Assessment Differentiated Math Centers Preparation for Mathematics Standardized Assessments Standards Data analysis and implications for instruction 2018-19 CEP 75  Science: Preparation for ESPET Classroom/Cluster Teacher Connection (maintain continuity) STEM projects Literacy through the content area Data analysis and implications for instruction Standards Social Studies: Literacy through the content area Classroom/Cluster Teacher Connection (maintain continuity) Multicultural culminating activities Data analysis and implications for instruction Standards Other Setting Long and Short Term Goals Scheduling Lesson Planning Differentiated Instruction for ELLs UDL Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) ENLs’ Instructional needs Inter and Intra- visitation observations and feedback Students with IEPs Using Data to Drive Instruction Tests - NYSESLAT, LAB Incorporation of the Arts through the Content Areas ENL teachers attend meetings and turnkey best practices to all staff members including assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators. Related service providers and monolingual, ENL, and Bilingual Teachers meet with coaches during Study Groups, Grade Conferences and Team Meetings to plan how to best meet our ELLs’ needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff such as teachers, parent coordinators, etc., are supported by school leadership through various professional development opportunities. Monthly differentiated professional development calendars are disseminated and staff are encouraged to attend both on-site and off-site opportunities. Professional development for non-ELL pedagogues are created and delivered by ELL pedagogues in order to familiarize staff with the needs of the ELL population and offer strategies to help them transition from elementary to middle school. The Guidance Counselor receives off-site professional development to assist ELLS as they transition. Such activities may include, but not be limited to How To Fill Out Applications and Making Middle School Choices. As per Jose P., staff development is on-going whereby all staff serving English Language Learners are informed about ENL methodologies and best teaching practices. Training is done by certified ENL teachers and the Network. Specific activities include professional development on collaborative learning, differentiation strategies, how to read ELL data, how to support newcomers, and the identification and placement process for ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 76  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides not only annual, but regular, be it weekly or monthly, opportunities for meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss students progress and program goals. Each parent is sent home a letter each month reminding them of their option to schedule a meeting with ENL teacher during a prep or professional period during the week. Parents can schedule as frequently as desired. An annual meeting with parents is further implored and requested by both sending out a letter and phoning in attempts to schedule a meeting. As most of our parents are Spanish speaking, if not able to speak English, both ENL pedagogue and parent coordinator can communicate in said language. Those parents speaking a language other than Spanish, and not speaking English, will have the translation and interpretation unit scheduled for their meetings. This form will not let me type in response to the question below (2), so, I will answer here. Records of annual individual meetings with ELL parents are retained on dated sign in sheets for in person meetings and excel spreadsheet for all other forms of outreach - successful or not. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P.S. 290 we recognize that families and other community members are a vital part of all students’ academic and social success and consider family involvement a central ingredient for a successful educational program. Parents participate in the following activities: Teacher and Parent Meetings- Scheduled daily based on teachers' prep schedule Parent Book Club- Monthly discussion of provided reading translation available Parent Workshop Series- Development of parenting and social skill development Parent fitness program PTA Meetings - Timely parent information provided and support from in school and outside agencies Leadership Team Meetings - committee of staff and parents meet to plan and discuss school policy Dial-A-Teacher- Homework help provided Books & Breakfast- Parents and students celebrate through literacy and art based activities Father/Child Dinner/Breakfast Learning Walks- Parents invited to participate in physical activities while discussing educational topics Family Movie Nights- Parents and students share the experience of watching a film together and group discussion Open House- Parents are invited to meet with support staff and visit classrooms for orientation Open School - Individual parent teacher conferences Arts & Crafts - Parents invited to create projects Intervention Meetings - Parents invited to individual meetings to discuss student progress and meet school support staff and connect with support from outside agencies Books & Breakfast- Parents and students are invited to dress as their favorite storybook character and participate in literacy activities Morning Math- Parents and students participate in math based games and activities Family Friday - Parents are invited to visit thier child's classroom to participate in a literacy lesson Parent Nutrition Workshop Parents of ELLs also participate in the activities listed above, as well as, orientations conducted by the two ESL teachers. The parent coordinator, Bilingual and ENL teachers, and the Translation and Interpretation Unit are available to provide translation services and to unite the teachers and parents. 2018-19 CEP 77  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 78 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brigitte Newell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 79  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 290 Juan Morel Campos School DBN: 19K290 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Brigitte Newell Title Principal Ms. Miriam Crespo Assistant Principal Ms. Roldan Parent Coordinator Mr. Blum, Ms. Bialy, Ms. Marti Ms. Neglia Ms. Roman Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A 6/26/18 N/A 6/26/18 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 80  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K290 School Name: Juan Morel Campos Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBr The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Leonor Roldan Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During enrollment, the two licensed ENL pedagogues, conducts informal oral interviews in English and in the native language with parents to determine the home language. If we cannot communicate in the native language, the translation and interpretation unit is employed. This is done within the first 10 school days after enrollment. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) HLIS data informs the pedagogues in the school of our written translation and oral interpretation needs. The data reveals that approximately 30% of our parents need written and oral translations. All parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand through translated materials such as HLIS, program brochure, program selection form, entitlement letters, and progress reports. With the assistance of the parent coordinator, ENL teachers, bilingual teachers, and bilingual school aides, parents are informed of all school activities, and oral translation services are readily available on-site. 2018-19 CEP 81  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred languages for both written and oral communication are that 30% of our parents need written and oral translations in Spanish and roughly 5% in other languages (i.e., Chinese and Arabic). The other 70% need English. We have found that due to the fact that P.S. 290 has a large Hispanic population, there was a need to hire bilingual personnel so that someone is always available to translate in Spanish for both oral and written communication. The personnel hired for these translation services are the parent coordinator, SAT Team, school aides, and bilingual teachers. Findings are reported to the school community in a variety of ways; Staff is notified of our translation needs initially during orientation. They may also be reminded when needed during faculty conferences, professional development, share sessions, etc. The school community is informed of the findings and need for translation services via the variety of Spanish, English and additional language information that is disseminated. These things include, but are not limited to the following: postings, PTA meetings, report cards, Parent-Teacher conferences, and face-to-face contacts. Spanish Spanish Spanish 30% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 CEP 82  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school disseminates documents throughout the school year. For the 2017-2018 school year, the list of documents include, but are not limited to the following: Annually - Parent Handbook Monthly - School Calendar Annually - Testing Calendar Monthly - Parent Newsletter With Leadership Team Meeting Notes Four Times Per Year - Report Cards Bi-Monthly - Individual Student Progress Reports - Subject & Content Specific Monthly, all documents Our parent coordinator translates all documents that go home. 2 Times Per Year - School Survey Monthly - Activity Specific Fliers & Notices Annually - After School Information Annually - Spring Academy information 2 Times Per year - Promotion In Doubt notification 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 83  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? At P.S. 290 we recognize that families and other community members are a vital part of all students’ academic and social success and consider family involvement a central ingredient for a successful educational program. The parent coordinator, Bilingual and ENL teachers, and the Translation and Interpretation Unit are available to provide translation services and to unite the teachers and parents. Face to Face meetings take place from September 2017 to June 2018 and include, but are not limited to the following: Daily - Teacher and Parent Meetings- Scheduled daily based on teachers' prep schedule Monthly - Parent Book Club- Monthly discussion of provided reading translation available Monthly - Parent Workshop Series- Development of parenting and social skill development Monthly - Parent Nutrition/Fitness program Monthly - AM & PM PTA Meetings - Timely parent information provided and support from in school and outside agencies Monthly - Leadership Team Meetings - committee of staff and parents meet to plan and discuss school policy Our Parent Coordinator or other personnel translates for parents. We have key personnel in the building to translate. Once Per Year - Mother/Child Dinner/Breakfast- Parents and students celebrate through literacy and art based activities Once Per Year - Father/Child Dinner/Breakfast Spring & Fall - Learning Walks- Parents invited to participate in physical activities while discussing educational topics 3 Times Per Year - Family Movie Nights - Parents and students share the experience of watching a film together and group discussion Once Per Year - Fall - Open House- Parents are invited to meet with support staff and visit classrooms for orientation 3 Times Per Year - Open School - Individual parent teacher conferences 2 Times Per Year - Arts & Crafts - Parents invited to create projects 2018-19 CEP 84  On An As Need Basis - Intervention Meetings - Parents invited to individual meetings to discuss student progress and meet school support staff and connect with support from outside agencies 2 Times Per Year - Books & Breakfast- Parents and students are invited to dress as their favorite storybook character and participate in literacy activities 2 Times Per Year - Morning Math- Parents and students participate in math based games and activities 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of an emergency, our Parent Coordinator in addition to our bilingual teachers speak Spanish. They are easily available for the parents if they need to contact the teacher or administration. In addition, we have a school messenger system which allows parents to receive messages in their home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to fulfill the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, during staff orientation in September, staff members are informed of the translation services and resources available for parents. A majority of our parents speak Spanish and we have several key personal in the building to assist with language translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663, all parents are asked to complete the Home Language Identification Survey, at registration. We determine at registration during a student’s enrollment, the primary language spoken by the parent. If that language is other than English, we determine whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with our school personnel. Our school maintains appropriate and current records of the primary language of each parent. Such information is maintained in ATS on the student emergency card, and in an ELL compliance binder. P.S. 290 provides translation services upon request and if a parent chooses they may use a relative or family member to assist them with translation. In addition, written communications are also provided in Spanish, for which there is a 2018-19 CEP 85  need due to our high Hispanic population. P.S. 290 accommodates any translation needs by enlisting resource personnel, and/or by utilizing the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Parent notices are sent in English and other languages informing parents of the availability of translation and interpretation services at P.S. 290. In addition, copies of such notifications are posted in a prominent location near the main entrance of the school. We provide parents whose primary language is not English with a translation of any document that contains individual, student-specific information regarding, but not limited to, a student’s: a. health; b. safety; c. legal or disciplinary matters; and d. entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic program. Our school’s safety plan contains procedures that ensure parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Parents receive translated versions of the Parent Involvement Policy,and a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are conducted annually and the information provided, as a result, are used to ascertain our quality and availability of service. In addition, our ongoing parent forums and meetings are in part dedicated to having an open discussion with the parents to "check in" regarding our quality of service. We maintain an Open Door policy, and our parents know that they may give use feedback on our quality and availability of translation services at any time. 2018-19 CEP 86 
