2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K299 School Name: P.S. 299 THOMAS WARREN FIELD Principal: CARLEEN MILLER-BAILEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Thomas Warren Field School 32K299 333200010299 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 88 Woodbine Street Brooklyn, New York 11221 718-473-8230 Phone Number: 718-574-1080 Fax: CarleenMiller-Bailey CMiller11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: CarleenMiller-Bailey DeNeil Pollack-Campbell Bibiana Hoyas Sharon George NA NA District Information Sheila Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11221, Room 300 SGorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP 3  131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, New York 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name CarleenMiller-Bailey DeNeil Campbell Bibiana Hoyas Cynthia Dowdy Bibiana Hoyas NA NA N/A Sharon George Diane Lopez Ursula Lowery Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Assistant Principal UFT / Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kimberly Twitty Erika Palacios ShaquanaByrd Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The School’s Mission Statement: “Through home, school and community partnerships, the administration, teachers and staff of P.S. 299K are committed to helping students to become lifelong learners, creative thinkers and productive citizens. This will be achieved through a community of learners who collaboratively seek more in-depth content knowledge and innovative 2018-19 CEP 9  pedagogical practices to provide opportunities for independent learning illustrated by students engaging in a variety of academic discourse which initiates content inquiry, scholars making their thinking visible, supporting claims, and challenging the assertions of their peers." Principal’s Vision: To empowers all students to be independent thinkers and intellectual risk-takers equipped with an array of strategies to advocate for the advancement of learning and the improvement of their community. The School Code: Be Present, Be Prompt, Be Prepared, Be Positive, Be Productive 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Thomas Warren Field is an elementary school with 240 students from Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5. The school population is comprised of 50% African American, 48.48% Hispanic and 1.52 % White students. The student body includes 14.39% English Language Learners, 17.05% Special Education Students and 100% of students receive free lunch. Boys account for 48% of the students enrolled and girls account for 52%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 91.5%. Bushwick as a neighborhood is having a renaissance. The neighborhood like many others in New York City is quite multicultural. P.S. 299 has an on-going collaboration with the Salvation Army. Many of our students attend an after-school homework assistance program at the Salvation Army building, which is located only 2 blocks away. Our grades 3-5 students have in the past conducted a service project serving the less fortunate for Thanksgiving and was greatly received and appreciated. We plan to continue several other service projects in collaboration with the Salvation Army this school year. One of these projects includes a collaboration with the Salvation Army Band and the P.S. 299 Brass Band. Other strategic partnerships and community based collaborations include: The Studio in a School, Arts Connection, Junior Tennis League, Downstate Medical, Touro College, International Lions Club, Service in Schools Summit, Evergreen Baptist Church, Columbia University Medical Center, SWERVE Church (who have brought volunteers from the University of Tennessee and the University of South Carolina to provide support at our school), The WE Program, Ballet Tech, the 83rd Precinct of the NYC Police Department and AAA Safety as well as other worthwhile partnerships. We are expanding our student service learning projects and visiting "service in school partners" to find other external partnerships for our school as it relates to student and family health and wellness. There is a climate of cooperation where everyone works as one. Staff members extend their support and offer their unique talents and abilities wherever they will have a positive impact on students achievement and social-emotional growth. This stems from a leadership style of openness and trust. Staff members hold themselves accountable to complete their work and to work together to assist others. We are always striving for an environment of mutual support and trust. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school’s strengths are collaboration amongst teachers and reaching out to new staff members with support. The school’s accomplishments are that the school has become a learning community where teachers share best practices and teaching strategies with each other. Last school year, several teachers volunteered to be video taped while teaching concentrating on questioning and discussion techniques. Teachers also open their classroom doors for inter-class and inter-grade visitations with a particular focus followed by debriefing sessions. Teachers have also opened their classroom doors for colleagues from other schools to share teaching strategies. 2018-19 CEP 10  The school’s challenges are moving our English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities further along academically and bridging the gaps in instruction and academic performance especially in English Language Arts. We will analyze the June instructional reports and item analysis in ELA and Math to target the needs of groups of students. For our sub-groups, we will identify specific research-based strategies to scaffold and bolster their learning. We will provide a myriad of professional learning opportunities for strengthening teachers questioning and discussion techniques as well as developing independent learners through sharpened teachers' craft of engaging students in learning. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school made the most progress over the past year were: 1.4 Maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults creating a positive learning environment. 3.4 Conveying high expectations through the mission and vision statements, along with the school motto and school code which continually motivate students to become lifelong learners, resourceful thinkers and productive citizens. The key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will continue to be Questioning and Discussion techniques, Student Engagement and the implementation of pedagogical practices presented in a clear manner with supports and resources easily accessible to all students. Based on a recent visit by the Superintendent, the former area cited was proficient and we are striving for well developed areas that will make a greater impact on student achievement. Our elements of Focus based on the Superintendent's Visits are: 1.2 Establishing a coherent understanding of how pedagogical practices across classrooms support discussion and student work promoting student independence for learning. Monitor the delivery of lessons to ensure that they consistently include appropriate learning tools, scaffolds and entry points. 2.2 Developing a structure to support teachers in capturing appropriately ongoing student learning outcomes and yielding timely valuable information so that it leads to instructional adjustments. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K299 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 265 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 92.8% % Reduced Lunch 15.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 47.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.08 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 73% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 7 7 91.4% 3.4% 18.5% 50.2% 0.0% 0.8% 2 11% 9.2 23.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing the NYS ELA and Math scores, the priority skill areas were identified by teachers of grades 3-5. There was a increase in the percentages of students who made significant progress in 3rd grade in ELA in 2017 (2.39 up from 2.29 in the spring of 2016). We attribute this to the work that was done with our 2nd graders during the 2015-2016 school year. Our focus for this year will be on accelerating the learning by being more purposeful in moving more students to levels 3 and 4 in ELA and Math in grades 4 and 5. This information will be updated when the 2017-2018 state data becomes available. We will explore exemplary writing programs and strategies to develop more academic vocabulary and the writing process. Based on the 2017-2018 school year, data shows that both the 5th as well as 2nd are our grades of focus. There are three priority standards for Literacy: Anchor standard 4, Word Meaning; Anchor Standard 2, Main Idea (literary and Informational); and Anchor standard 8, Reasons and Evidence. There will be a school-wide effort to increase students conceptual understanding of mathematics within the Operations and Algebraic Thinking Domain: Two-Step or Multiple-Step Word Problems. Teachers are continuing to effectively move toward analyzing and using data to make strategic adjustments in their instructional practices for students needing additional support. Our school’s strengths are as follows:  There is a mutual culture of trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of the students and staff. QR 1.4  The Danielson's Framework for Teaching is used to communicate high expectations for rigorous instruction  and learning. QR 3.4 Setting goals by gathering data to assess organizational effectiveness and promote adult and student learning. QR 3.1 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal#1 Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 CEP 13  By June 2019, all students in grades kindergarten to 5th grade will make a three (3) to five (5) percentage points increase in meeting proficiency in mathematics. Growth will be measured using the data collected from students' performance on the New York City Performance Assessment and the New York State Mathematics Assessment. Student performance will also be measured in the classroom, evidenced by the level of student engagement through discourse and written articulation of the mathematical concepts under study. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  PS 299 will change it s mathematics curriculum from Go Math to Engage NY Mathematics. There will be a shift in mathematics instruction to provide a more student-centered approach with opportunities for inquiry and conceptually-based learning.  Professional development is designed to provide teachers with the tools to immerse students in meaningful-real world tasks that requires engaging in rich discourse around mathematical context, utilizing both content specific vocabulary and academic language.  This student-centered approach to learning requires the implementation of the gradual release model with a focus on number talks and inquiry; small group collaborative activities; collecting, analyzing, and using data to make make learning more accessible to meet and include the needs of diverse learners.  Teachers will be provided with professional learning using progression documents to diagnose the "grain size" learning needed to bridge "gaps" in understanding and the appropriate strategies to employ depending on the learners' need.  Brooklyn North Field Support Center mathematics Instructional Lead and resident math coach will implement inquiry rounds with a focus on the problem of practice to conduct lesson-study, co-planning, co-Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Team (Administrators, math coach, teacher leaders, and teachers) will provide a series of professional learning opportunities to assists with deepening content knowledge and pedagogical skills. All teachers Grades K-5 (including ELLs & SWDs) September 2018-October 2018 Baseline Assessment October 2018-November 2018 December 2018-January 2019 2018-19 CEP 15 teaching, inter-visitations, analyzing low-inference notes alongside analyzing student work to develop supports to advance teacher practice and student learning. Teachers will follow a school-wide protocol for mathematics problem-solving to assists students with unpacking word problems, visualizing the context, and making sense of the relationship between numbers and operations. All teachers Grades K-5 Sept. 2018-December 2018 January 2019-June 2019 All teachers will be responsible. Administrators will monitor the implementation and use of the problem-solving tool. Teachers Teams will devise a problem of practice that would address the area of need. Through teacher inquiry, research-based strategies will be implemented, teams of teachers will construct coherent assessments to create a system of progress monitoring to check the effectiveness of the practice and the level of mastery of the standard. All students October All teachers will be will have at least two portfolios 2018-December 2018 January 2019- May 2019 responsible for implementation of student portfolios and the process will be Sustaining the implementation of Learning Targets as visible and aligned references that demonstrate teacher intentions and student learning expectations for the day. All teachers Grades K-5 monitored by Administration. Sept. 2018-December 2018 January 2019-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 16  Parent workshops will encompass use of mathematics tools to manipulate, models, and navigating on-line websites. Parent will be provided with techniques for reading the mathematics reports generated by i-Ready diagnostic assessments and how to incorporate mathematics problem-solving in everyday life routines. Workshops will be provided during the two Parent Teacher Conferences (Nov. 2018 & March 2019)and during the two Family Engagement Evenings (September 2018 & May 2019), along with various workshops for parents and Parent Academies during the school year. The Instructional Mathematics Coach, teacher leaders, and the parent coordinator will plan a series of workshops and classroom visits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through the Brooklyn North Field Support Center, the mathematics instructional lead will provide professional learning opportunities on Monday's. Facilitate demonstration lessons and inter-visitations with debriefing and next steps. PS 299 will be staffed with an in-house mathematics coach to facilitate Monday's professional learning, assists with implementation of research-based strategies, co-planning/co-teaching, and provide a math institute for teachers to drop-in for planning instruction and assessments. i-Ready computer-based mathematics program and the Ready mathematics program will be purchased for student at-home and in-school use. Students will be provided with 90 minutes of uninterrupted mathematics instruction and the use of mathematics stations for spiralling the curriculum:  professional learning combining content and pedagogy (every Monday)  an after school mathematics team students will engage in friendly competitions with peers across grades 3-5 (December -May) supplemental Common Core aligned materials for After-School programs;   professional resources and materials for teachers;  and parent resources including Parent Academies during the school week and weekend with refreshments included Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 will be our mid-point benchmark  Using EngageNY Modular benchmark assessments, students will make 5% increases between the BOY and MOY benchmark assessments; and another 5% increase between the MOY and EOY benchmark assessment (ongoing assessment). 2018-19 CEP 17   Using the NYC Performance Task, the students should make a 5% increase between the BOY assessment and the MOY benchmark assessment (administered end of January).  Using the Ready Assessment (paper and pencil), students should make a 5% increase in identified priority standards.  Using the iReady online assessment, students should make a 5% increase in the identified priority standards.  Using low-inference observational notes along with student work, the instructional team will analyze the effectiveness of the pedagogical practices the teacher implements to engage students specifically, the constructed classroom tasks that mirror the level of rigor prescribed by the CCLS.  Questioning that scaffolds learning, diagnose learning, Teachers will look at various data to monitor the progress of their students in order to make adjustments to the instruction as needed. We will also look at the various professional development opportunities that staff attended to improve their questioning and discussion techniques and the implementation of learning targets that are visible, aligned and demonstrate teacher intentions and student learning expectations.  Progress monitoring in formative assessment and re-teaching using different strategies to periodically monitor student learning will be a focus and will be observed by building leaders during formal and informal teacher evaluations. The SLT team reviewed this goal and agreed that there has been improvement in the instruction of students from the beginning of the year until this mid-point benchmark based on the DIBELS assessment, unit tests and other benchmark assessments. Formative assessment/ periodic progress monitoring of special education student goals, and ENLS in a model classroom will be monitored as well as the use of AIS services by a special education teacher and ENL teacher. In looking at our action plan for this goal we realized via parent input that more support is needed with homework help including translation and a sample of how to complete the homework. Ideas were shared including reaching out to our high school and college partners to volunteer and work with our families with homework help.   Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) For Grades K-5: NYC Mathematics Performance Task BOY, MOY, and EOY Assessments For Grades K-5: EngageNY Module Beginning of Module, Mid-Module, and End of Module Assessments (Modular Benchmark Assessment) For Grade 3-5: i-Ready Diagnostic, Middle of Year, and End of Year Assessments (on-line) For Grades 3-5: Ready Mathematics Assessment BOY, MOY, EOY Assessments (paper and pencil) For Grades 3-5: NYS Mathematics Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school’s strengths include, but are not limited to:  Teachers are supported by each other as they work collaboratively. The entire school embraced a Book of the Month “Have You Filled A Bucket Today” and the positive language used in the literature was known by all and used by all students. In the 2018-2019 school year we will continue with the book, "7 Habits of Happy Children" as well as other books of the month.  The school works cohesively to establish a respectful, caring environment that promotes adult learning and enhances students; academic and personal growth via Harmony Program, Restorative Practice and Kids At Hope.  High expectations for student growth are conveyed to the entire community  The school engages in a positive incentive program that rewards students for exemplary behavior and academic progress and achievement continuously throughout the year.  There are specific protocols used to keep the school orderly and safe.  Students engage in self expression through the arts which allow a diversity of learning styles to be embraced as the school continues to apply for grants to augment our enrichment through the arts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #2 Supportive Environment By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in attendance compared to the 2017-18 school year raising the attendance data from 91.5% to 94.5%, to be impacted by parent outreach by family workers, the guidance counselor, staff and administration as evidenced by logs, attendance, and ATS reports. (QR 3.1). 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will teach lessons from “Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies” otherwise known as the PATH Curriculum and the Sandford Harmony Program at least 30 minutes a week. Parents will be made aware of the lessons from the curriculum. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in Grades K-5 Sept. 2018- Teachers, Guidance June 2019 Counselor, SAPIS Worker and Administrators Team members, Attendance teacher, Administrator and Social Worker from local shelter Attendance Team will hold bi-monthly meetings to discuss students who have chronic attendance problems and develop next steps Targeted students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Targeted Sept. 2018- Guidance Assistance will be provided to students and families to ensure that students who are coming to school are supported by our partnerships with outside agencies: SAPIS worker outreach to students Social workers    Guidance counselor outreach to families as needed  Special events planned for before and after holidays and other special days such as: awards assemblies, movies, trips, extra periods of recreation, etc. students & June 2019 Counselor, Sapis their families All Sept. 2018- Teachers, parents Teacher and parent conferences to continue to monitor student attendance and strategize for success: students June 2019  Teachers will share student data, 2018-19 CEP 20  Specific techniques and strategies for working with students  And social emotional qualitative data 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged and supported in understanding what are the characteristics of a supportive environment at home via parent workshops and monthly P.T.A meetings which are held every 3rd Thursday. The Parent Coordinator will be the organizer of these sessions along with the members of the P.T. A. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Student incentives for 100% attendance and certificates for those most improved. Resources, literature, games and videos will be provided to enable multiple entry points for all students. Per diem/per session opportunities will be provided to enhance teacher participation and attendance at professional development workshops as well as to enable teachers to work with students while parents are engaged in meetings and workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will continuously monitor student attendance through: individual sessions/parent meetings, telephone calls/home visits and letters home. We will have individual folders to record information and steps taken to increase student attendance. In addition we will review the ATS reports generated to monitor attendance. *RISA (daily, weekly and monthly  Progress monitoring through the PPT and SIT teams on a monthly basis and/or monitoring by the family  worker to do outreach Student data from previous years will be accessed and monthly analysis will be done to establish progress and comparison of attendance percentage for the student from the perspective of past monthly attendance  There will be a mid-point check in February 2019 of any chronic absentism. Parent letters will be generated, along with parent meetings scheduled with teachers, BTG (Bridging the Gap)Social Worker, and administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 21  We will progress monitor students via ATS attendance reports and parent outreach. Chronically absent students will have their own attendance folder that will be reviewed by the attendance team on a weekly basis. Despite the increase in flu illnesses, our attendance team continue to meet on a regular basis to discuss cases of chronic absences and lateness. There have been many and varied incentives to encourage excellent attendance and punctuality which includes, certificates, special assemblies and events. Our attendance is above 90% and we are still moving toward the mark in the smart goal. Student folders have been created to target students who need additional support in the area of attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the QR from 2015-2016, it was noted that there was collaboration amongst teachers in planning lessons and units of study. There were classroom visitations that were conducted as well for teachers to view best practices. Teachers will continue to provide multiple entry points for all students along with conferencing with students. The planning will take place at least twice a week. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #3 Collaborative Teachers By June 2019 100% of classroom teachers will engage in cycles of professional development around our school-wide instructional foci of questioning and discussion techniques, student engagement as well as social-emotional support to be led by teachers and administration, as measured by agendas, sign-in sheets, teacher reflections and an increase in student questioning and discussion performance. (QR 4.1) 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continuously assess power strands using multiple forms of assessment and include data in school-wide tracking forms. The data will be used to adjust the pacing of lessons and inform student grouping; this information will be shared with parents on an on-going basis:  at parent teacher conferences, and at parent visitation nights  during PTA meetings and  other special events such as grandparent’s day, bring your father to school day, etc. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018- Teachers of Grades /Parents June 2019 K-5 including Teachers of Ells and Students with Disabilities Teachers will assess reading lessons/tasks daily using a school-wide teacher created tracking form. Data will be used to make adjustments to the curriculum and inform student groups Teachers Sept. 2018- Teachers of Grades /Parents June 2019 K-5 including Teachers of Ells and Students with Disabilities Sept. 2018- Teachers, A.P. June 2019 Sept. 2018- Teachers, A.P. June 2019 Teachers will continue to evaluate MOSL data and ELA & Math Benchmark data. Analysis of assessments will be used to create action plans, make adjustments to the curriculum and further differentiate instruction Teachers /All Students Professional Development to provide assistance with data analysis and resources Teachers &Network Support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families and teachers will continue to collaborate and work together in order for them to support their children at home. These collaborations will take place on Tuesdays during parent engagement time and also during parent 2018-19 CEP 24  teacher conferences in Nov. 2018 and March 2019. Other times for two way communication and learning about effective strategies to use at home would be in September 2018 and May 2019. The persons responsible will be the Parent Coordinator, Administration and Lead Teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coverage for teacher attendance at workshops in and out of the school as well as materials and planning time after school. Resources will include, but not be limited to:  Administration   DOE PD sessions regionally or city-wide Fellow colleague inter and intra-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Per Diem coverage to accommodate teacher attendance at workshops in and out of the school, resources and materials and per session opportunities will be provided to enable increased teacher planning time after-school. Progress will be monitored through benchmark:  DIBELS  Running records  Descriptive feedback changes   MoSL exams Student writing samples and performance tasks Strategies for SWDs and ENLs to be implemented this year:  Creating push-in team work to target ENLs and SWDs using an AIS model  Creating pull-out sessions using AIS techniques and strategies to target individual student needs in the area of reading and mathematics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring will be done through classroom observations by administration, walk-throughs, and administrative collection of class assessment data. Administration along with teachers review and analyze data and it's part of the professional development cycles of learning. We are still working towards the majority of teachers using self-assessments and making the necessary adjustments to the instructions. In addition to classroom observations by administration, teachers have given input in terms of their needs to be able to better improve 2018-19 CEP 25  instruction and the academic success of the students in their classes. Information regarding student progress is shared with parents continuously throughout the year using progress reports, Google Classroom, report cards and parent engagement opportunities on Tuesday afternoons. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the PPO from last year, teachers were observed using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. School Leaders emphasize and insist on maintaining a culture of mutual respect and positive attitudes that support the academic and personal growth of students and adults. According to the Fall 2017 Superintendent visit feedback, the Principal implements a range of strategies to communicate high expectations across the entire school community, offering appropriate supports, and utilizing transparent accountability measures, which result in sound family partnerships and student advancement. The priority needs for this framework competency is to ensure that the learning targets are visible and demonstrate teacher intentions and student learning expectations for the day's lesson. Tasks need to be designed with appropriately challenging tasks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #4: Effective School Leadership By June 2019, 100% of teachers across Grades K-5 will strengthen formative and summative assessment practices, including students self-assessments so that assessment data leads to targeted teaching adjustments as measured by administrative observations, lesson plans, and improvement in state ELA, Math scores of 2 to 5%. (QR 2.2) 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development will occur every Monday for 80 minutes based on topics of need and interest as expressed by teachers on a professional development survey built on trust. Pedagogical Sept. 2018- Professional staff from June 2019 Learning grades Pre-K-5 Committee and Administrators Professional Learning Committee will meet at least once a week to plan differentiated professional development for the teachers and paraprofessionals with concentration on our instructional focus Teachers on Sept. 2018- PLC staff and the June 2019 Administration There will be a Lesson Study conducted. The new teachers will also benefit from the Lesson Study. The teachers trusted themselves and each other in assessing grades and learning the new math curriculum and standards. Professional development will continue in the areas of: Student Engagement  Close reading  Questioning techniques and Discussion   Guided Reading and Writing Shared Reading and Writing   Conferring committee New Sept. 2018- Teachers and teachers June 2018 Administrators and 6 week teachers cycle new to a grade Professional Development for Teachers will impact ELLS and SWDs by: All teachers of ENLs/SWD Students October 2018-June 2019 Teachers and Administration  Creating push-in team work to target ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model  Creating pull out labs for ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model  Creating pull-out lab sites using RTI hands-on techniques and strategies to target individual student needs 2018-19 CEP 28  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will understand what constitutes effective leadership and learn strategies to continue to promote parent leadership and leadership via P.T.A. meetings. workshops, conferences, etc. The Parent Coordinator along with Administration and the Literacy Coach will meet on a regular basis from Sept. 2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coverage for teacher attendance at workshops in and out of the school as well as materials and planning time after school. Presenters from various support organizations for professional development. Per-session and per diem to cover teachers. Resources will include, but not be limited to:  Administration   NYCDOE PD session, regionally or citywide Fellow colleagues' inter and intra-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Professional Learning Community Committee will meet between December 2017 and January 2018 to distribute another survey in which staff can provide feedback. The feedback will also be shared by administrators based on classroom visits and observations. Student summative assessments in the content areas will be used  Benchmark language abilities assessment will be used to measure effectiveness   Administrative observations  Teacher qualitative data gathered during teacher team meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring will be done through classroom visitations with an emphasis on student questioning and discussions, student engagement, agendas, and sign-in sheets. Information regarding student progress is shared with families on a regular basis. Students are encouraged to fully participate during class lessons to "show what they 2018-19 CEP 29  know" in respectful ways. We are continuing to observe lessons especially in reading and mathematics where higher order thinking questions are posed and there's more rigorous discussion amongst students. Our findings are noted on informal and formal observations with next steps for improvement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 299’s strength is the improvement of student outcomes by addressing the needs of the families as well as the students qualitative data.  Research shows that an increase in parent involvement contributes to an increase in student achievement.  There are strong family/community ties through continuous communication regarding student achievement through correspondence, workshops and partnerships. QR 3.4 The school hosts many parent involvement activities not limited to:  Annual Dad Bring Your Child to School Day  Annual Grandparents Day  Mother's Day Breakfast Celebration  Art workshops held by Studio in a School.  Annual Father's Day Breakfast Celebration  Dr. Seuss Family Reading Night Students data shows:  Our SWDs and ENL need further language development and RTI work  All students need more opportunities to interact in collaborative group work and in student questioning  All students need more targeted work towards improvement in writing through better formative assessment Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #5 Strong Family-Community Ties By June 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will keep families informed of the students’ progress, the common core learning standards (NGLS-Next Generation Learning Standards) and how they can best support their children’s academic 2018-19 CEP 31  progress as measured by a 5% increase of parent attendance via tracking parent’s sign-in sheets at various events, the four parent teacher conferences, and workshops during the day, evening and weekends as well as needed resources obtained from the community. (QR 3.4) 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents Sept. 2018- Classroom Teachers will inform parents of their child’s academic and social progress by providing monthly progress reports. of students June 2019 Teachers overseen Pre-K parents will receive a work sampling report at least three times during the school year. All parents March and and Pre-K Social K-5 November, by Administrators Teachers will provide parents with the data for SWDs and ENLs based on their targeted RTI work and accelerated assessment models  Creating push-in team work to target ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model  Creating pull out labs for ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model  Creating pull-out lab sites using RTI hands on special techniques and strategies to target individual student needs of Pre-k June Worker and PC students Parents will be informed about the common core standards and how the work in the classrooms reflects the standards and the shifts during Family Night, Parent Teacher Conferences and during Tuesdays Parent Engagement time. All Parents Sept. 2018 Teachers and November Administrators There will be many opportunities to familiarize parents about the common core standards (NGLS- Next Generation Learning Standards), text complexity, close reading for evidence and what parents should see in their child’s backpack. Special meetings will be held on Saturdays for working parents to familiarize them with the common core standards, social-emotional issues, information for families and students in temporary housing, grade expectations and other activities All Parents PTC Sept.2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, Parent Coordinator All Parents January Teachers. Pre-k-5 2019-May Administrators, (PC), Guidance & SAPIS 2019 2018-19 CEP 33  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. There are several CBOs that support the students in our school. The organizations are listed in the school narrative have been extremely supportive over the years. Please see above. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Materials and resources for parents, books for the parent lending library, books with listening tapes to support ENLs and SWDs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will be on-going after each school-wide parent teacher conference, Fall and Spring Family Engagement time after Tuesday Engagement Time as well as PTA meetings and workshops via attendance sheets and evaluations. By the end of January 2019, we will summarize our findings regarding communication and parent engagement and develop next steps for improvement. Professional development in the areas of formative and summative assessments will be provided to teachers in several ways including, but not limited to:  Teachers/administrators share learning received at PD outside our building from our support center/DOE to facilitate internal professional development in our school building throughout the year.  Progress monitoring in formative assessment and re-teaching using different strategies to periodically  monitor student learning will be a focus and will be observed by building leaders. Formative assessment/ periodic progress monitoring of special education student goals, and ENLS in lab site classrooms using the RTI model will be studied to replicate successes in other classrooms should the work be fruitful.  Creating push-in team work to target ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model and accelerated progress monitoring  Creating pull out labs for ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model and accelerated progress monitoring  Creating pull-out lab sites using RTI hands on special techniques and strategies to target individual student needs Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress monitoring will be done via attendance sheets of various events and meetings and evaluations. Evaluation comments will be reviewed by the administrative cabinet. The instrument used will be Dibels and Periodic Assessments. As expressed at SLT meetings we will continue to provide more information to all parents regarding the CCLS for the grades. In March we already have several parent workshops scheduled around The CCLS and NGLS as it pertains to student success on the New York State ELA and Math Exams for grades 3, 4 and 5. All parents are invited to the workshops. Students in grade two which is a focus grade for independence and success in reading, writing and 2018-19 CEP 34  mathematics. Test practice material ordered for grades 3, 4 & 5 have also been purchased for grade 2 students as well to help prepare them for 3rd grade. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades K-5 students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Close Reading, Small group and During the school who score on the Literacy work individualized day, for a minimum intensive level based stations, Leap Track, instruction on the Dibels Voyager Passport, of 2 periods per week for grades K-5 assessment. Grade 3-5 students who scored a level 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA Exam Mathematics Grades K-5 students who score level 1 on the Fall Benchmark assessment and or 0-25% on the BOY Math NYCPT, Grade 3-5 students After-school program, MYONOnline Reading Program, modeling, repeated practice, technology support Math work stations, V-Math, Go Math, After-school, Engage NY, use of manipulatives, modeling, repeated practice, technology support (Mathletics) who scored a level 1 or 2 on the NYSMath Exams Small group and During the school individualized instruction day, for a minimum of 2 periods per week 2018-19 CEP 36  Science Grade 4 students who Close Reading, work Small group and scored a level 1 on stations, modeling, individualized the 3 rd grade New repeated practice, instruction York State ELA exam and 4 th Grade Students identified by their teacher as a result of baseline,benchmark, and unit exams in Science. Social Studies Students who are technology support. Out of classroom personnel will also provide AIS services to identified students. Classroom teachers will provide added support for students identified as level 1 Close Reading, Small group and identified by their technology support, individualized teacher based on research based instruction results of the projects, use of Newsela benchmark assessment and unit During the school day for a minimum of 2 periods per week During the school day for a minimum of 2 periods per week. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) exams. Students who have been identified as chronic absentees as well as students whose academics are at risk Guidance Counselor, BTGSocial Worker Small group and During the school day will discuss steps individualized instruction students can take (Harmony Program, 7 Habits of Happy Children for a minimum of 2 periods per week. 2018-19 CEP 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 59 students in temporary housing, both in shelters and doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing receive support with school uniforms, school supplies, trips and other extra-curricular activities. Their attendance and punctuality is closely monitored by the Attendance Team including the Bridge The Gap Social Worker assigned to our school. Outreach is conducted when STH attendance falls below 92% and there's chronic absenteeism or poor punctuality. There is continuous communication with the on-site DOE shelter staff and Social Workers. Support staff in the school building include the: social worker, guidance counselor, SAPIS specialist, parent coordinator, and administration. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 38  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teaching candidates are vetted and hired centrally through the NYCDOE. This process ensures that all DOE teachers meet State eligibility requirements. The school, in turn, ensures that teachers are HQT for the subject and level being sought by working collaboratively with the Network Human Resources Director. In addition, teachers will be working in teams to: analyze student work samples and norm the ratings by grade   examine their formative assessment techniques and strategies  analyze which teaching techniques and strategies are working best for ENLs and SWDs 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Teachers and Paraprofessionals will be supported by :  The Administration through classroom visitations, formal and informal observations with high quality actionable feedback , professional development in and outside the school building.  Weekly professional development on Mondays as determined by PD surveys and observations  Weekly Collaborative Team Meetings  Weekly Vertical Planning Meetings  Danielson Framework PD sessions    Examine their formative assessment techniques and strategies  Have a better understanding of which techniques and strategies are working best for ENLs and SWDs  In addition, teachers will be working in teams to: Study student work samples and norm the ratings Summer professional development provided by the DOE, ELI, and Brooklyn North Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 40  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). In order to assist preschool children from Early Childhood Programs, there is a parent orientation on the first day of school. The curriculum is common core aligned. There is joint professional development centered with a focus on the Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools as well as professional development topics especially for pre-k teachers. There are numerous parent involvement activities such as the Miss Spider’s Tea Party, Pre-k Olympics, Reading Day, assembly programs and trips. There’s early intervention screening and a student & family history questionnaire. The two pre-k classes are staffed by two experienced early childhood teachers and two experienced paraprofessionals who work extremely well as a team. Annual articulation occurs through the following:  Meetings between pre-K and K teachers articulate student progress and needs before moving up.  Serve as conduits between teacher and parents before students graduate to Kindergarten; and create a more profound understanding for Kindergarten teachers on any Social emotional needs of students  There are several visitations arranged in May and June for Pre-K students and their parents who attend other day care centers in the community to visit P.S. 299. Pre-K students and their parents tour the school plant, visit Kindergarten classrooms, and have lunch in the student lunchroom before returning to their program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers plan lessons collaboratively during common planning preparation periods as well as on Tuesday afternoons. The Pre-K teachers communicate with administration regarding assessments and screenings used with the Pre-K students. In addition, teachers will be working in teams to:  Study student work samples and norming of a rubric. 2018-19 CEP 41   Examine their formative assessment techniques and strategies  Questioning techniques and strategies including methodologies for Socratic Seminars Teachers will better understand which techniques and strategies are working best for ENLs and SWDs by:  Creating push-in team work to target ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model  Creating pull out labs for ENLs and SWDs using an RTI model  Creating pull-out lab sites using RTI hands on special techniques and strategies to target individual student needs 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 214,387.00 134,163.91 X X -------------------------- --------------------- 12,366.95 1,499,678.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 2018-19 CEP 42  used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Thomas Warren Field School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Thomas Warren Field School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level,e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. * Continue to provide support to the PTA in the their efforts to continue to mobilize parent Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee ● supporting or hosting Family Day events such as Grandparents' Day, Dad bring Your Child to School Day, a Dr. Seuss Reading Night, Family Literacy & Math Night, Mother's Day Luncheon and a Father-Daughter Day Dance and Father-Son Basketball Game. ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 CEP 46 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template [Thomas Warren Field School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 49  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 299’s Title III program will provide English Language Learners with supplementary instruction in an ESL/Literacy Support – After School from November 1, 2018 to May 31, 2019 on Wednesday and Thursday from 2:45 to 4:45pm. Students will be grouped for instructions by levels, the ratio of teacher to students will be 1:10. This instructional program will service ELLs in grades K-5 who scored at the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning levels on the NYSESLAT. A certified ENL teacher will co-teach with a certified common branch teacher and will provide supplementary instruction in English in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. 48 sessions of the program will have three groups : newcomers, kindergarten /first/second grade, and third/fourth and fifth grades.Teachers will provide instruction in team-teaching and flexible grouping.We will use dual language reading books and dictionaries, and on-line translation resources. We will focus on developing students’ writing and reading skills by providing an integrated meaning focused approach, which will include differentiated instruction based on itemized assessment analysis, scaffolding, effective phonemic awareness, phonics instruction, and fluency instruction. Students will be engaged in speaking,reading, listening and writing activities. Administrative leadership will continue to show its support to the implementation of Language Allocation Policy at P.S. 299 by purchasing materials that are high quality, high interest and instructional resources in English and the native language.The materials are supplemental and distinct from daily used instructional materials. For Grades 1-3 Moving-in-to English Series will focus on comprehension, fluency, vocabulary development, and provide language learners with tools and strategies of language acquisition. Grades K to 5 will utilize the Harcourt Science Series which implements the Science Performance Standards of Science exploration and inquiry through the use of hands-on materials and activities, and leveled science library. In addition all teachers will be using the ESL Support Book, which provides activities and ideas for addressing language needs in three critical areas: Comprehensible Input, Language and Vocabulary, Background and Experience. In order to expand the technology initiative, we will foster an understanding of the concepts and principles of technology by providing ELLs with Internet access, use of online technology and application to integrate technology in the content areas. We will implement research-based supplementary literacy computer program Destination Learning and MYON to provide ELLs with rich, diverse language. Parents will be notified in preferred language about the program, schedule, and program's events. All the program documents (Attendance, Parents Letters, Teachers planning agendas)records will be maintained in TITLE III Document Folder in central location for ease of review. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: In order to enhance the progress and success of the ELLs Administrative leadership will continue to show its support by providing an on-going professional development for the ENL teacher, as well as for teachers who are working with the ELL population. The ENL teacher will attend and turn key for following workshops: 1.Nuts and Bolts of Creating ELL Programs on November 14, 2017 2. Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) , provided by Brooklyn North Field Support Center. Classroom teachers will attend Essential Components for ELLs Instruction in the Math Classroom Workshop on November 20, 2018 and December 4, 2018. ENL teacher will provide Supporting ELLs' Literacy Development Workshops once a month. Teachers working for Title III program will participate in reviewing data and setting goals for students. They will review the program highlights and develop curriculum and activities for students and parents. In addition, the Language Allocation Team working collaboratively with the grades inquiry teams will meet regularly to discuss a continuous improvement, data-driven approach to help ELLs performance, using item analysis, portfolio assessment, and other indicators to identify and address students weaknesses and target areas for growth. We will continue our commitment to well-designed professional development to our diverse students’ population by attending monthly Professional Development workshops. We will continue to conduct ESL workshops at our school in the 2018-2019 school years with the assistance of the Instructional Support Specialist from the Brooklyn North Support Field Center on topics such as: Effective Instructional strategies for ELL s, Scaffolding for Language development to Support ELL in Second Language Acquisition Stages and Developmental Levels, Differentiated Instructions for ELLs – Identifying students’ learning styles, differentiating content, process, product/assessment to meet the individual student needs, Scaffolding in Math and Science, Implementation of the Common Core Standards and Data Analysis and instructional implementation. The ENL teacher will maintain attendance and agendas of all meetings and records in the TITLE III Document Folder in a central location for ease of review. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: To facilitate parental involvement and community partnership, our school parents coordinator will continue to organize a variety of monthly parental workshops presented by bilingual instructors. At the beginning of the school years our Bilingual Parent Coordinator in 2018-19 CEP 53  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities collaboration with the ENL teacher distributes Parent Surveys in order to find out the needs that the parents would like to have address during Parent Workshops throughout the school year. To ensure home/school communication, bilingual parents are provided with translated notifications and materials. Some of the monthly partnership activities at P.S. 299 will include topics such as: Common Core Learning Standards, ELA Curriculum, Assessments Informational Meeting for Parents, Learn Strategies You Can Use at Home to Prepare your child for the New York State ELA and Math Exams(parents will become familiar with the English Language Arts and Math performance standards - including the Common Core Learning Standards). NYSESLAT and Review Your Child Progress Workshop for parents. We will conduct orientation Title III After school Program parents conference. Parents will be invited for the Readers Theater Presentation. Tentative schedule for workshops: Reading aloud at Home and Bilingual Library Introduction Workshop by Ms. Zaslavskaya, ENL teacher on November 30, 2018, Foundation for Early Learners by Ms. Ransome, Literacy Coach on December 6, 2018 Parents Make and Take activities by Ms. Ransome, Literacy Coach on January 11, 2019, DIBELS Introduction by Ms. Vigo -3rd Grade Teacher February 8, 2019, MYON Reading by Ms. Peralta Technology Teacher on March 6, 2019 Parents will be notified of these activities in the preferred language. All notification and informational letters will be maintained in Title III document folder in a central location for ease of review . Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 54 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Thomas Warren Field Elementary School Borough Brooklyn School Number 299 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Wilma Kirk Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher T.Zaslavskaya Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Vigo Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Gutierrez/Kindergarten Related-Service Provider Ms. Flores Superintendent Shelia Gorski Assistant Principal Sharon George Coach N/A School Counselor R. Carrington Parent Bibiana Hoyas Parent Coordinator J. Sanchez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 247 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.19% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In order to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs we use Reading 3D assessment, DIBELS, NYSESLAT, ELLS Baseline Assessment and NYC Performance Assessment. This data will help include students in differentiated activities, and use a variety of strategies. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The literacy coach and administration provide professional development and support for teachers administering the assessments. there is also a time line for completion of the assessments to keep everyone on track. 2018-19 CEP 57  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate success of the ENL Program by analyzing the NYSESLAT data during horizontal and vertical inquiry team meetings. We monitor ELL’s progress on an ongoing basis. If students do not demonstrate progress, we review the goals and the strategies to make the necessary changes. We adjust activities and instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We identify at-risk students and share the data with classroom teachers and support stuff. The team analyzes the data and adjusts approaches and strategies for the students, and reviews it on monthly basis 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses data to develop instruction for ELLs, following the RTI framework. For each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school determines the additional support services to be provided, we review the data with the inquiry teams to determine whether students are benefiting from the programs, to build more effective instruction for students who are not benefiting, to compare the efficiency of different forms of instruction, and design more effective individualized instruction. Our teachers have formed a study group for using the co-teaching model in our work with ENL students. We are beginning a study group in which teachers will articulate their work together, share data, curriculum and instruction tools to improve their efforts and program for ELL students. We have gathered baseline data for grades 3-5 through the Periodic Assessment for ENL students, and for first graders we are using an adapted Baseline Assessment which measures all modalities. The students are targeted for skills based on this data and shall be retested several times throughout the year to monitor their progress. In addition, we are sharing tiered classroom assignments in the content area whenever possible and we are devising weekly writing formative assessments with the classroom teacher to measure student progress in their reading and writing comprehension. Based on the aforementioned assessments, we will obtain data and target students in groups to improve the modalities and skills on a student-by student basis. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the NYSESLAT 2017 data results, we had found that we have 59% of our ELL students are on the Expanding level across grades (k-5), 28% students across grades are on Transitioning level, 15% ELL students across grades are on Emerging level, and 8% ELL students across grades are on the Entering level. 4 ELLs (10.3%)scored at Commanding Level, 2 ELLs scored Expanding AND 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam. 10 ELLs advanced 1 proficiency level, 3 ELLs, advanced 2 proficiency levels, one student advanced 3 proficiency levels. 13 ELLs remained at the same proficiency level, and none of our ELLs regressed on proficiency levels. ELL Data Analysis Tool shows that our ELLs did not score at or below 25th growth percentile on ELA, one student scored at or below 25th growth percentile on math. We don’t have over-aged and long -term ELLs. Three ELLs(7.7%) held over in past 3 years, 5 ELLs (12.8%) with at risk level 3 or greater, 5 ELLs (10.3%) with at-risk level 5 or greater 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We review ELL Data Analysis Tool with classroom teachers, ENL teacher, and services providers. We identify at-risk students; review their data results in different subject areas and language development area as well. We work as a team to develop the next steps in each student learning progress, using scaffolding and differentiation. We study NYSESLAT modalities for students that remained at same proficiency level on NYSESLAT, and planning their development in different modalities. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 58  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The school follows heterogeneous model (mixed proficiency level on the same grade).The program, which fully aligns to the Common Core, provides an appropriate balance of literary and informational text, and aims to facilitate comprehension of the four basic languages skills-listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students are grouped by grade with different proficiency levels. In our school students are served by grade and by class in most instances. In instances where there is a self contained Special Education class on the same grade as the general education class housing our ENL students, the Special Education students are integrated with the general education students. We use push-in and pull-out co-teaching models. Meetings are held once or twice a month and teacher talk daily to articulate the curricula and instructional methodologies used, such as content parity using different materials, tiering of activities and written work. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our freestanding ESL program uses the following as mandated - the push-in model of ENL instruction for grades K-2 and Pull-out Model for grades 3-5, are designed to accommodate and service 360 min. per week of ENL instruction to students who scored at the entering (Beginning) and emerging (Low Intermediate) levels, and 180 min. per week of ENL instruction to students who scored at the transitioning (Intermedtiate) and expanding (Advanced) levels. Students who scored at the commanding level will receive 90 min per week. In September the Assistant Principal in charge of program scheduling reviews the Spring NYSESLAT scores in order to provide each ELL with the number of minutes of ENL and ELA periods as mandated to by NYC CR Part 154. In addition, the ENL teacher works in congruence with the classroom teachers to assure that each ELL is receiving the mandated ENL periods. We use push-in and pull-out co-teaching models. Teachers either co-teach in the room or teach the same content, concurrently, using different methodologies or materials. Teachers may vary the process and the product maintaining integrity of the content. Meetings are held once or twice a month and teacher talk daily to articulate the curricula and instructional methodologies used, such as tiering on activities and written work. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The program fully aligns to the Common Core, and provides an appropriate balance of literary and informational text, and is aimed to facilitate comprehension of the four basic languages skills-listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students are grouped by grade with different proficiency levels. In addition, the ENL teacher works in congruence with the classroom teachers to assure that each ELL is receiving the mandated ENL periods. Students' classroom teachers in most instances speak their native language and are able to provide native language assistance when necessary. Our 100% free-standing ENL program uses a variety of approaches in working with our ELLs: Language Experience Approach methods, as-well-as, pre-teaching vocabulary development, activation of prior knowledge among others. We use push-in and pull-out co-teaching models. Teachers either co-teach in the room or teach the same content, concurrently, using different methodologies or 2018-19 CEP 59  materials. Teachers may vary the process and the product maintaining integrity of the content. Articulation co-teaching meetings are held once or twice a month and general education teachers informally talk with the ENL teacher, daily, to articulate the curricula and instructional methodologies used, such as tiering on activities and written work. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not have bilingual classes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a.Our plan for SIFE students includes: identifying all SIFE students through parent interview and student assessment, and preparing an Academic Intervention Plan for each SIFE student. We will assign a member of the Academic Intervention Team to each individual student to make sure that all SIFE students are involved in the after school programs, Saturday Academy. b. Plan for Newcomers When a new student is registered in our school, we provide then following resources to facilitate the transition. • An informal student orientation by the ENL Teacher • Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist her/him during the day • Provide student with explicit teaching of academic language in all content areas with the use of visuals and hands-on experiences to promote language development in content areas. • Encourage student to participate in the After School activities in ELA, Math and Science if applicable. • Informal assessments as well as progress monitoring in order to identify possible Academic Interventions programs such as: Wilson Program, Leap Frog Reading Intervention, Voyager Passport, Harcourt Literacy Intervention Station, on-line Phonics and Reading Program such as Destination Learning. • Provide student access to age-appropriate, culturally relevant, and level appropriate class libraries and grade appropriate instructional materials • Home school communication in the Native Language c. ELLs receiving services 4 to 6 years in addition to intensive academic intervention will be provided with explicit teaching of academic language (reading and writing with differentiated instruction, utilizing scaffolding strategies, and emphasis on language patterns, vocabulary development, content area structures and lexicons. d. Long-term ELLs (in NYC school six years or more), will be identified by BESIS. Yearly progress on and NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies Exams will be used to drive instruction. Long term Ells, in addition to intensive Academic Interventions, will be provided with accelerated, high quality instruction in English as a Second language utilizing scaffolding strategies with differentiated instruction, and emphasis on language patterns, vocabulary development, content area structures and lexicons. e. We continue to monitor students’ progress after exiting ESL program for the next two years. Former ELLs are provided with an additional support in literacy through the use of scaffolds and web based programs. Our students/Former ENLs, continue to receive at least .5 units of study or its equivalent of Integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area or other such services, approved by the Commissioner [CR Part 154- 2.3(h) (1)(v)]. Our former ELLs get extended time for the NYSELAT and ELA as well as other testing as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our policy for special needs students include: ensuring that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. We plan to improve achievement levels for special needs students by reviewing all assessments we will be able to identify the stumbling blocks of progress: disability vs. language issues as well as determine the instructional/intervention service. To provide strategies and skills necessary to improve literacy development and math skills students will receive intensive academic interventions such as: ICT, small group 2018-19 CEP 60  instruction and one-on-one instruction by classroom teacher, the IEP teacher and /or SETSS teacher. Our services and include individualized learning support through teacher conferring and periodic assessments that measure our students' language and academic progress, in order to improve academic outcomes for our students. We are developing and sharing tiered writing activities in the content area and evaluating the students' abilities weekly in order to provide AIS based on an RTI model of varying methodologies, process and products as a means for measuring students' successes in the content and their second language development. In addition, while for example the general education teacher may be teaching exploration of the Americas in his or her classroom, the ENL teacher will be doing the same, with tier two or three activities shared by the classroom teacher, greater time spent on vocabulary development, visuals such as SMART Board projection of interactive maps, focused vocabulary and appropriate DVDs to visually stimulate and solidify concepts. etc. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Bridging resources between ELL and SPED departments; will assist us in developing more inclusive classes and mainstreaming activities, as well as, providing more extensive professional development, effective instruction strategies and collaboration among General Education, Special Education. and the ENL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We want to focus on phonics and vocabulary development for entering, emerging, and transitioning levels. For expanding and commanding levels we will be working on comprehension skills. Our ENL services include individualized learning support and periodic assessments that measure our students' language and academic progress in ELA as well as mathematics, science and social studies, in order to improve academic outcomes for our students. We are developing and sharing tiere three writing, social studies science and math performance task activities. Students will be served in the all content areas and teachers will be formatively evaluating the students' abilities weekly in order to provide AIS based on an RTI model of varying methodologies, process and products, as a means for measuring students' successes in the math, social studies and science content, as well as their second language development. Data will be gathered formatively. Descriptive written and orally expressed feedback will be given to students. Formative and summative data will be gathered by our teachers to modify instruction and to move students to their next zone of proximal development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will develop theme units aligned with Common Core and Classroom Curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ENLs are afforded equal access to all school programs such as: the 37 minutes small group tutoring, after school. In addition, P.S. 299’s Title III program will provide English Language Learners with supplementary instruction in an ENL/Literacy Support. We will begin an after school program for all ENL students in November 2017 for continued support with vocabulary development in the content area with a special emphasis on writing from a language experience approach to learning. Continued articulation with the classroom teacher to obtain the data necessary to inform the program's instruction will benefit our students. ENL students are offered all enrichment and extracurricular activities that the general education population is offered. This includes Studio in the School, our music program, student council and Mighty Milers. All after school program providers: Salvation Army, Arts and Literacy and Traditional Day Care to name a few are able to be accessed by all ENL families. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 61  Classroom Resources •Moving Into English Harcourt •My Sidewalks on the Reading Street Scott Foresman •ESL Accelerating English Language learning Scott Foresmen •Simple Solution English Grammar & Writing Mechanics Nancy McGraw & Nancy Tondy •Elements of Reading Vocabulary Isabel L. Beck & Margaret G. McKeown •The Picture Dictionary Skills Book Seddon Kelly •Preparing for Excellence Silver Moon Press •Decodable Books Harcourt •Phonics Practice Reader First-Place Reading •Common Core Guided Reading Library The Learning Connection •Leap Frog Schoolhouse Audio Books Library On-line Resources: MYON, Destinarion Learning Our ENL students have access to several computers in the ENL Lab, and they are offered the same computer classes as their mainstream/general education counterparts. Our computer teacher is bilingual and able to teach ENL Spanish speaking students in the native language as necessary. Grade level appropriate and adapted classroom materials and visuals such as CD's, interactive maps, etc., are utilized as special resources for our ENL students, in and outside the general education classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through native language books in the library and promotes reading in native language at home. Parents can borrow bilingual books from the ESL teacher for reading with children at home as well. In addition, our bilingual teachers can assist students who are having difficulties grasping key lesson concepts in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 CEP 62  All students at PS 299 receive equality of services, and all resources are shared equally among General Education, Special Education and classrooms housing our ENL students. All students are involved in enrichment classes, after school programs, assemblies and given equal opportunities to participate in any and all activities, such as, Student Council, Service Learning and the Mighty Milers. Since we have all ENL students integrated into our General and Special Education classess, they are receiving an education and the services equal to their English mono-lingual counterparts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Classroom Resources •Moving Into English Harcourt •My Sidewalks on the Reading Street Scott Foresman •ESL Accelerating English Language learning Scott Foresmen •Simple Solution English Grammar & Writing Mechanics Nancy McGraw & Nancy Tondy •Elements of Reading Vocabulary Isabel L. Beck & Margaret G. McKeown •The Picture Dictionary Skills Book Seddon Kelly •Preparing for Excellence Silver Moon Press •Decodable Books Harcourt •Phonics Practice Reader First-Place Reading •Common Core Guided Reading Library The Learning Connection •Leap Frog Schoolhouse Audio Books Library On-line Resources: MYON, Destination Learning Our ENL students have access to several computers in the ENL Lab, and they are offered the same computer classes as their mainstream/general education counterparts. Our computer teacher is bilingual and able to teach ENL Spanish speaking students in the native language as necessary. Grade level appropriate and adapted classroom materials and visuals such as CD's, interactive maps, etc., are utilized as special resources for our ENL students, in and outside the general education classroom. 2018-19 CEP 63  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities for newly enrolled ELLs consist of an Orientation Assembly, School Tour, and Meet the Teachers. These activities are facilitated by the PTA, Administration, ENL Teacher, Parent Coordinator, Speech Therapist and other school personel as needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to enhance the progress and success of the ELLs Administrative leadership will continue to show its support by committing funds to provide an on-going professional development for the ENL teacher as well as teachers who are working with the ENL population. In addition, the Language Allocation Team, working collaboratively with the grade inquiry teams to discuss a continuous improvement, data-driven approach to help ENLs performance; they will be using item skills analysis, portfolio assessment, and other indicators to identify and address student weaknesses, and to target areas for growth. We will continue our commitment to well-designed professional development for our diverse student population by teachers attending monthly professional development workshops. We will continue to conduct ENL workshops at our school in the 2017-2018 school years with the assistance of the Instructional Support by our Brooklyn North Borough Support Team on topics such as: !-Effective Instructional strategies for ELL s, October 9, 2017 -Scaffolding for Language development to Support ELLs November 13,2017 - Second Language Acquisition Stages and Developmental Levels December 11,2017 -Differentiated Instruction for ELLs – Identifying students’ learning styles, differentiating, content, process, product/assessment to meet the individual student needs January 15, 2018 In addition, our teachers have elected to work collaboratively on an inquiry team related to co-teaching strategies and articulation about our ENL students. This decision was made after the ENL teacher Ms. Zaslavskaya and our Assistant Principal attended a training at Fordham University; they turnkeyed information on CR-Part 154 and the ENL co-teaching models. Teachers have committed to working once or twice monthly to articulate their work and to discuss their co-teaching techniques and strategies. We continue to work on series Common Core Learning Standards PDs. We also provide teachers with the mandatory professional development on ELL mandates as needed. Please see above. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 64  A minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All records we keep in the accessible office location. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Schools individually meets with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Parents get letter notification about the meeting. Classroom teacher, administration, ENL teacher, and subject areas teachers inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and other subjects. Such a meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents participate in orientation meetings and parents workshops on a variety of topics from the CC curriculum in mathematics and ELA to what ever topics they may requested at meetings, or through administrative generated surveys. This school year we planned following events and workshops: -Bring Your Father to School Day; 09/19/2017 -Bring Your grandparents to school day 09/14/2017 -pre-k and early childhood meetings 09/07/2017 -Hispanic Heritage Month Celebration 10/20/2017 -Healthy Eating and Living 10/11/2017 -Understanding the Language and Rubric Guide 10/24/2017 Multicultural Show June 2018 We have Computer Lab and library open for parents every Tuesday from 2:30 to 3:15. All record of meetings and agendas are kept in the main office. Our administration, teachers, SAPIS worker and Parent Coordinator are all instrumental in communicating with parents of ELLs and in making these meetings work. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Wilma Kanova Kirk, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Thomas Warren Field School DBN: 32K299 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms.Kirk Ms.George Ms.Sanchez Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Ms.Zaslavskaya ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms.Flores Parent Teacher/Subject Area Ms.Gutierrez Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms.Carrington School Counselor Sheila Gorsk Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32k299 School Name: Thomas Warren Field Superintendent: Lillian Druck The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Tatyana Sharon Ameila Jeanette Zaslavskaya ENL Teacher George Flores Sanchez Assistant Principal Speech Teacher Parent Coordinator Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess language preferences for written and oral communication by collecting data from Home Language Identification Survey, ATS report, and Emergency Contact Cards.The ENL teacher also meet with the new parents to the school and engage in conversation regarding the language needs of their children. The parent coordinator is also available to translate when necessary. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1. English 2. Spanish 3. Arabic 4. Bambara 391 157 7 1 69% 28% 1.25% 0.18 388 158 6 0 69 28% 1.07 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families September through June 2017-2018 The following documents are typically disseminated throughout the year: school activities newsletters, Letters/notifications, welcome letter,curriculum overview, parent-teacher conference announcements, parent workshop invitations and curriculum and testing information. All of these documents are translated in Spanish. Calendars Parent Handbook Monthly Yearly After School Program Information 4-5 times a year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents are translated by our bilingual Parent Coordinator and other bilingual staff. Translated by Parent Coordinator or other staff Translated by Translation Department Translated by the Parent Coordinator or other staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 70  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our parent coordinator and other bilingual staff on each floor support our teachers and staff with translation. Formal meetings we have during the school year are: September through June - ELLs Parents Orientation throughout the school year as parents register their children. Informal interactions are continuous throughout the school year such as: phone calls by support staff when needed, individual meetings with parents and written communication to parents. Parents will also be provided with outside resources when necessary such as locations for GED courses, tutoring, etc. Parents may also ask for additional academic resources to help their children at home. The partnership between school and home is important and valuable. Family Night September and May Parent Teacher Conferences November and March New Parent Orientations September Translators are available on each floor of the building Translators are available on each floor of the building Translators are available on each floor of the building 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school's safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that all parents in need of language access services are able to reach the school's administrative office. All parents will be notified in the event of a school emergency. Individual emergency blue cards contain the preferred home language in which parents will be notified. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 CEP 71  The ENL teacher turn keys information after each workshop on updates on educational policy and regulations for English Language Learners. Staff members are given a copy of ELL Policy and Reference guide. This guide is reviewed by all pertinent staff in the beginning of the school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will follow the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 as outlined in Section Vll including the notification requirements noted above. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 100% of our parents have participated in the School Survey and will continue to do so. We will create a parent survey which is specific to the services provided to parents whose language or the language of their children is not English dominant. 2018-19 CEP 72 
