2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K305 School Name: P.S. 305 DR. PETER RAY Principal: JULIA MORTLEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Dr. Peter Ray Elementary School 331300010305 PK-5 344 Monroe Street, Brooklyn, NY 11216 School Number (DBN): 13K305 718 789-3962 Phone Number: 718 622-3474 Fax: Dr. Julia Mortley jmortle@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Dr. Julia Mortley Ms. Clora Stovall Ms. Wanda Pinnick Ms. Marilyn Sebro Ms. Wanda Pinnick N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 13 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. Barbara Freeman Superintendent: 355 Park Place, Brooklyn, NY 11238 Bfreema6@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 636-3284 Phone Number: 718-636-3266 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) North Brooklyn Ms. Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  131 Livingston Street, Room 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Julia Mortley Ms. Tracy Askew Ms. Shakeba Dunn Ms. Marilyn Sebro Ms. Tracy Askew Ms. Carolyn Corley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable SLT Chairperson UFTChapter Leader Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Ms. Debra Davis Ms. Malicia Midgette Ms. Shakeba Dunn Ms. Tirsa Ramdin Ms. SarahHenderson Ms. MerylSkeete Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ PTAPresident Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Principal Member/ DC 37 Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Public School 305 is a Pre-K to5 elementary school that is located in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, New York. It is a well-kept 55 year old building that is co-located with Middle School 301. At P.S. 305, our mission is to provide students with a rigorous curriculum that promotes thinking and creativity by focusing on developing the whole child to reach his/her potential as a learner. In keeping with our school’s motto, “It 2018-19 CEP 9  takes a whole village to raise a child,” our goal is to ensure college and career readiness for every learner by engaging all stakeholders in collaborative decision-making. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. According to the latest available ethnic data, 76.71% of the students are African American, 6.85% are Hispanic and, 4.79% are Asian; 6.84% are American Indian/Alaskan Native and Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander and 4.79% are white. The majority of our students are from low income families with approximately 91% qualifying for free lunch to date. In keeping with the demands of the Common Core Standards (CCS) which calls for rigorous instruction, more collaborative professional learning and addressing the needs of the whole child and having knowledge of your students, we are focusing on supplementing teacher practice, the school’s instructional focus, and our students’ social and emotional well-being and attendance rates with programs, collaborations and partnerships that will impact upon student achievement in ELA and Math. For the past 7 years, we have implemented PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Support) system to reward students for good behavior academics and attendance. This school year, we will continue to supplement PBIS with the Franklin Covey’s, “The Leader in Me” program which will provide a structured school wide improvement plan to help both students and adults reflect on social emotional behaviors. To address the needs of our struggling readers we will continue our partnership with Reading Partners to provide one to one tutoring in the area of reading for struggling readers. We will continue to use the MyOn digital website program that allows students to access books at school or at home from any digital device (I-pad, laptop, android or I-phone etc.) to give our students an opportunity to improve in the area of reading. In addition, the Compass Learning/Pathblazers program will be used as a supplement to address the needs of our students approaching grade level standards in reading. In strengthening teacher practice, we will continue to provide support in the area of Math to the teachers with a consultant from Exemplars who will help teachers plan rigorous tasks upon completion of each unit and provide the coaching to improve instructional practice in this area. Moreover, we will continue with our Saturday Math Camp program to provide our struggling Math students with the essential skills to boost and enhance student performance in Mathematics. This year, we will delve into the TC Writing Units of Study to improve student writing by crafting rigorous on-demand common core aligned performance tasks for our students. Our school will work with a consultant who will provide coaching and mentoring for the teachers while planning rigorous tasks with them. We will also continue to strengthen teacher practice by utilizing the DataWise inquiry process to dig deeper so that we can move towards customization of instruction for groups of students. Our goal this school year for teachers is to continue becoming more proficient in using tuning protocols to analyze data, look at student work, reflect on lessons and invite their peers to observe them for feedback and suggestions. In balancing out the serious work that we have started to implement for this year, we will continue to conduct school wide activities that engage students, staff and parents in the school community. Our school wide activities include - the Back to School Parade, Fathers Bring Your Children to School, Wear your Jersey Day, the Village Run, Random Acts of Kindness Day,School Science Fair, Spring Fling, 100 Days of School Day, Valentine’s Day Dance, Easter Sock Hop, Career Day, Field Day, the PTA Fashion Show, School Carnival and more. We will continue to work on our goal of increasing parent attendance at these school events by engaging them through our themed parent engagement activities. 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. According to the latest preliminary NY state ELA and Math open ended assessment scores, the SWD and ENL are still performing below grade level. PS 305 will focus on ensuring that all students in these sub-groups are provided with rigorous differentiated instruction that is based on the specific goals and objectives that are identified in their individual IEP's and ELL plans. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reflecting on the recommendations made on the last Quality review, it is very clear that our strength lies in setting high expectations and executing our plans so that staff, students and parents understand the goals of the school. Our challenge however remains in moving our students to higher levels of proficiency in the areas of ELA and Math. We will therefore continue to focus on close reading of texts by incorporating more independent reading into our daily program, building vocabulary, improving group discussion by finding and citing text based evidence and asking higher level questions and infusing rigor into performance tasks in both ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K305 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 139 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 21 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.2% % Reduced Lunch 17.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.9% 10.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.08 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 64% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 10 10 88.0% 2.2% 23.7% 69.8% 8.6% 2.9% 0 33% 9.9 32.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At P.S. 305, one of our major goals is to set high standards and implement instruction that is customized, inclusive, motivating and aligned to the Common Core. Based on the data from the June Instructional Report, EOY school wide assessments and the ORS report from 2018, the students at PS 305 have made significant gains in the following areas: 1.Vocabulary Acquisition and Word Meaning are improving as a result of the school wide implementation of the 'Word of the Week" initiative. 2. There has been a decrease in the number of student incidences involving behaviors that must be input in the ORS based on the school wide implementation of "The Leader In Me" initiative and the school wide PBIS. 3. There was an increase in the level of student proficiency in math as a result of the implementation of the school wide 'Math Exemplars" initiative. Based on the student data collected from the fall implementation of the Ready Gen Baseline Assessment for grades K-5, F&P K-5, Go Math BOY K-5, ELA Released Questions Assessment 3-5, the Math Released Questions Assessment 3-5 and information from our most recent Quality Review in January 2017, it is evident that our instructional core needs to be strengthened. While our units of study incorporate CCLS and focus on close reading and citing text based evidence, we need to do the following consistently in all classrooms – Continue to dig deeper with student data in order to make curricular and instructional adjustments so that teachers can improve unit and lesson planning to: continue to use D.O.K to craft and ask higher order thinking questions; continue to increase vocabulary and writing performance tasks; and strategically plan and differentiate activities for SWD’s and ELL’s; and improve and increase specific actionable feedback to students. Last year’s Quality Review also recommended that we design units and lesson plans that incorporate rigorously designed academic tasks that emphasize higher order thinking skills. Based on the most recent state ELA and Math Assessment and other local school data, there is a need at PS 305 for data analysis to be reflected in the instructional shifts of the school. Implement PS 305's Flow of The Day with fidelity in all classes to ensure that explicit teaching, modeling for students, guided practice and differentiated instruction is evident in all lessons. Number talks (Math Fluency) lessons taught daily. 2018-19 CEP 13  The utilization of student discussion prompts being used with consistency and fidelity to ensure that students are engaged in accountable talks. Given these recommendations, we will continue to focus on developing structures that will allow teachers to dig deeper using student data in order to adjust instructional practices that impact on student achievement in the area of reading. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 305 will set up structures wherein teachers can collect and analyze student data; monitor student progress and make curricular and instructional adjustments resulting in 65% of students making a minimum increase of two reading levels in the Fountas & Pinell Reading Benchmark system 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The District 13 Instructional Data Coach will continue to support the teachers so that they can continue to analyze student data, make adjustments to instructional practice and monitor the impact of instructional practice on student achievement. The Leadership/PD Team will also continue to work directly with grade teams in utilizing protocols that will help teachers reflect on their lesson plans and student work in order to make curricular and instructional adjustments in the area of reading The Borough Field Support Center ELA Coach will provide PD and guidance related to the implementation of instructional practices based on student data. The school’s ELA instructional leads will also help the school streamline the professional development program based on student data. The Borough Field’s Special Education Coach will work directly with special education teachers to ensure that strategies and activities for special education and at-risk students are appropriate and rigorous Support for teachers in the area of reading will be provided by the Borough Field Support Center ELA Coach and the Professional Development team. Support for teachers will also be provided by coaches from the Reading Partners program. This program provides one to one instruction in the area of reading for our Tier 3 students. Support for our students will also be provided through the MyOn digital reading program and support for our Tiers 1 and 2 students will be provided through the Compass Learning/Pathblazers program. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 to December 2018 District 13 Instructional Data Coach, Principal, Leadership/PD Team members, Teachers All teachers, Students September 2018 to December 2018 Consultants/ Borough Field Coaches, Principal All teachers September 2018 to December 2018 Principal, Borough Field ELA Coach Reading Partners Coach and Reading Rescue Coach, PD Team, Teachers Parent involvement programs will include themed parent engagement activities to inform parents about the curriculum and other aspects of school life. The goal is to promote literacy development at home and encourage parents to become partners with us in educating children. Parents, Families September 2018 to December 2018 Principal, teachers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 15  Monthly Parent Workshops - Parent Coordinator; Teachers Parent Engagement Activities - Teachers Four Times a year Class Newsletters - Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Borough Field Coaches to provide professional development in ELA/Reading practices ● Funding for Reading Partners to provide one to one reading instruction ● Central will provide MyOn Digital Reading Program and Compass Learning/Pathblazers Program ● Funding for Parent Activities ● Funding for sub teachers ● Funding for Reading Rescue materials (one to one tutoring program for first graders) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of March 2019, 60% of all students enrolled in grades K-5 will increase their Fountas and Pinnell reading level by 1 reading level. · Teachers will administer the second round of the Fountas & Pinnell reading benchmark system starting in January 2018 and ending in February 2019. By June 2019, 65% of our students will increase their Fountas and Pinnell reading level by at least two reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Fountas & Pinnell Reading Benchmark running records assessment will be used to assess progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At P.S. 305, it is one of our goals to provide a supportive environment for children by establishing a culture that makes children feel safe and supported by teachers and peers. Based on data from the OORS report, NYC School Survey In the past 6 years, we have been implementing PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Support) system to reward students for good behavior, academics and attendance. We have established a Go Green chart structure to monitor student progress in daily behavior and the S.T.A.R. ( Safety; Take Responsibility; Achieve Goals; and Respect for All. The Respect for All system to reward students for consistently demonstrating these traits. Although we are still continuing to streamline our activities related to PBIS (i.e., rewarding students with STAR Bucks; collecting data related to the Go Green Chart etc), individual student attendance still remains a challenge. Our attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year dipped to from 88% from 90%. However, we still need to address low attendance on half days. In the upcoming school year, we will be seeking to improve attendance to 90.5% while supporting our students with Franklin Covey’s ‘The Leader in Me” program – a program that focuses on addressing social emotional behaviors through reflection and character building activities Given that our attendance rate has dipped from 90% to 88% for this school year, we will continue to offer more incentives to celebrate students with 100% attendance; 90 - 99% attendance rates and improvement in attendance . We will continue to focus on engaging students, staff and parents to participate in a system that focuses on promoting positive social and emotional behaviors and rewarding students for demonstrating these positive behaviors and good attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see an increase in overall student attendance (from 88% to 90%) as evidenced by the PS305's end of the year attendance report. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Attendance Team will track the attendance of students through reports that monitor students who fall below 90% monthly. For students whose attendance fall below 90% but make improvements each month, the team will reward and acknowledge them for making progress. The Attendance Team will ensure that procedures are followed and that all key players understand their roles. Correspondence regarding attendance expectations will be shared with parents throughout the year The PBIS Team will continue to attend City wide sponsored meetings. The PBIS Team will continue to set up the reward students with S.T.A.R. Bucks when they improve in attendance, Stay on Green for the week (for good behavior) and attain 85% or better on their class based unit tests and school benchmark tests. The teachers will record the number of S.T.A.R. Bucks that students have accumulated in these three areas on a monthly basis via a PBIS Data tracking sheet and submit to the PBIS team. Team members in turn track this student data to reward students with S.T.A.R. Bucks so that the students can shop in the S.T.A.R. Bucks store. Parents will be notified when their children achieve good attendance, demonstrate good behavior and accomplish good grades. They will be notified with good news if their children also improve in attendance, behavior and academics. Our Parent Teacher Engagement activity in May 2019 will include an awards ceremony for both the students and the parents. A Student Awards/Recognition ceremony will take every month during Celebration Fridays. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students September 2018– June 2019 Monthly Attendance Team members, Principal, Teachers Teachers, Students September 2018 Monthly PBIS Team members, Principal, teachers Parents/ Guardians/ Families September 2018–Monthly Attendance and PBIS teams, Teachers, Principal, Parent Coordinator A refresher in “The Leader in Me” program will be reviewed with the staff. We will also continue to collect data from the monthly PBIS tracking forms from each class. The data relating to both programs will be shared with the school community. Teachers, Students September 2018 – June 2019 Monthly PBIS Team, Principal, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 19  Monthly parent Workshops - Parent Coordinator; Guidance Counselor; Support Team Parent Engagement Tuesdays - Teacher Meetings with Parents four times a year Monthly Newsletters to Parents - Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● PBIS/Leader In Me Team Coach to turnkey information learned from Citywide sponsored trainings ● The PBIS/Leader in Me Team Coach will provide ongoing PD to staff throughout the year ● PBIS/leader in Me Team members to provide professional development to staff ● Funding for S.T.A.R. Bucks store items ● Funding for Parent awards Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of December 2018, we will assess our first term attendance to determine progress towards our goal. · Daily ,weekly and monthly monitoring of attendance will take place · Monthly attendance will be shared with the staff · In January 2019, we will be looking for 90% or better in overall attendance We will also look for the number of students who improved their attendance by 5% from September 2018 to the end of January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 20  We will track our attendance through the following ATS reports - RRSA (aggregate student attendance); ROCR (daily class percentage report) and track our weekly attendance rates with the RSAL reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 305's teachers are consistently required to work as collaborative teams to analyze the student data, plan and implement explicit teaching, and engage in enquiry work around looking at current student work. At P.S. 305, our goal is to motivate all teachers to be committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and the school. It is our goal to establish a culture of professional collaboration wherein teachers will participate in professional development that will lead to increased student achievement and continuous improvement. In 2016, the 10% of students in grades 3-5 scored level 3 or 4 on the NYS Math Assessment. PS 305 will continue to implement the following to ensure a continued increase in student's proficiency in math: The teachers will analyze the benchmark assessment data, end of unit assessment data, BOY assessment data and the weekly assessment data to develop next steps for instruction based on the information/data developed from the protocols used to analyze student work. ● One of our strengths is that the teachers meet during common prep time and during OPW time to plan and anlayze data to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the students. Teacher teams at P.S. 305 continue to make progress in using protocols to look a t student work.. However, feedback from our Quality review in January 2018 highlight the need to become a bit more focused on delineating specific next steps for groups of students. In the upcoming school year, the teachers will continue to sustain the work of using protocols to cull and analyze data in order to determine next steps for students and adjust instructional practices by meeting with grade band teams during OPW time with the support of the District Instructional Data Coach. We will enlist the help of the District Instructional Data Coach to monitor our progress in this area as the inquiry work unfolds this upcoming school year. Our goal is to effectively support teachers in analyzing data to glean information about students’ progress and learning needs in order to make timely adjustments to curricula and instruction. We will determine our growth in this area by analyzing the shifts in teacher lesson plans to include additional planning for differentiation based on student data and conducting instructional rounds to specifically document how the data is being used to inform teaching. Given that our goal for this school year is to enhance and deepen the work of teacher leadership and to cultivate a culture wherein teachers continually support each other, grow in practice and build capacity to increase student achievement, we will continue to utilize tuning protocols to adjust instructional practice related to writing performance tasks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 22  By June 2019, 10% of students in grades 3 - 5 will perform at Level 3 or 4 on the End of Year Math performance task. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? District 13 Instructional Data Coach will conduct a refresher PD session on using protocols to reflect on lessons and adjust practice. Teachers/grade teams will practice protocols Teachers Teacher teams will focus on the data analysis process to work collaboratively to identify the students’ areas of weakness on the Beginning of the Year Math performance tasks and craft a prescribed plan of action for each student. Teachers will research and implement strategies to improve student outcomes, especially for ELL’s and SWD’s to ELL’s and SWD’s. The Borough Field ELL and Special Ed Coaches will support teachers by providing strategies that they can use in Math for ELL’s and SWD’s. Grade Team teachers will use data from mini Math tasks to glean information from student data to craft formative common core aligned Math performance tasks which will be measured by common core aligned rubrics. Teachers will be supported in writing unit and lesson plans by the Borough Field Math Instructional Coach. Grade teams, teachers October 2018- May 2019 September 2018- June 2019 TLP Team members Borough Field ELL and Special Ed Coaches, Teachers/Grade teams Teachers November 2018 – June 2019 TLP and PD team members Teachers will share progress reports with parents/families on how students are performing on Math performance tasks. Parents, Families Teachers October 2018 – June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops - Parent Coordinator; Teachers Parent Engagement Activities - Four times a year - Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 24  ● District 13 Instructional Data Coach will provide protocol training ● Borough Field ELL and Special Ed Coaches/Specialists to provide strategies for ENL’s and SWD’s ● Consultant and Borough Field Specialist will provide professional development in Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, grades 3-5 teachers will evaluate the results of the mid-year Math performance assessment for 10% of class performing at level 3 or 4 on the performance task rubric. ·teacher Teams will continue using protocols to discuss student data in Math ·The Principal will observe teachers in the instruction of open ended problems · The Principal will give observational feedback on strategies used by teachers to improve Math practice ·Teachers will administer mid-year performance assessment by the end of January 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grades 3-5 students will be given a NYS State Test released items - Mid-year and End of Year Math Exam Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It is the goal of leadership to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff and deliver the instructional and emotional support needed to drive student achievement. ● At the beginning of the school year, the principal communicates high expectations to the staff by discussing the State and City Wide Expectations; sharing student achievement results and school reports, reviewing the Staff Handbook, and engaging the community in setting goals for the school year. Engaging in the goal-setting activity together helps us to build a culture of mutual accountability and professionalism wherein all staff members begin to understand the expectations from the Danielson Rubric, ongoing professional development participation, grade team planning; and curriculum implementation. Giving staff an opportunity to have input in goal setting fosters a culture of collaboration and teacher leadership. Since clear expectations are also communicated around teacher practice and student achievement, one of the goals is to evaluate teacher practice using the Danielson Framework for Teaching rubrics Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the school leader will implement frequent cycles of observations using the Danielson Framework for Teaching so that 75% of teachers will demonstrate proficiency in their instructional practice as evidenced by 1 HEDI rating increase in one of the required components in Domain 3 (instructional practice) in the ADVANCE evaluation system 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will meet with Principal to establish one to two professional instructional goals based on last year’s areas of weakness as reflected on the Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric Teachers Principal will observe teachers and give feedback, especially in the goal that they are working on for the year. Teachers Teachers will engage in peer observations based on data analysis process of looking at student work and reflecting on lessons through the use of protocols Teachers ADVANCE talent Coach will provide PD on Domain 3 components for staff. Teachers September 2018- October 2018 September 2018- June 2019 January 2018 – June 2019 October 2018 – June 2019 Principal Principal Teachers Talent Coach; Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement Activities - Four times a year - Principal ; Teacher, Parent Coordinator Our Parents as Partners program is designed to empower parents to take a more active leadership role in the school. The parents are encouraged to participate and assist in facilitating specific parent engagement activities that focus in building parent's capacity to address the students, including SWD's and ENL's. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● ADVANCE Talent Coach to provide training - Funding for subs cover classes for peer observation and Danielson component training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 27  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, Principal will conduct one on one sessions with teachers and analyze ADVANCE reports to determine the percentage of teachers who moved up one HEDI rating in one of the required components in Domain 3. ● Each teacher will conduct a self-assessment on teacher practice progress before coming for one on one conference and bring student work to discuss progress. Principal will pull tracking reports from ADVANCE in preparation for one to one conferences Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The ADVANCE Observation reports tool in the ADVANCE web application will be utilized to track teacher progress - Observation reports; Teacher Level MOTP report School Level MOTP report and MOTP score tracker report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the schools current percentage of parent participation, which is derived from the number of parents participating in parent engagement activities that are sponsored by the school, parent surveys and sign in sheets from parent workshops, the Principals’ goal is to provide a warm and welcoming environment for families and developing partnerships to bring the much needed resources for families and students into the building. ● With regard to establishing partnerships with families to support students’ progress towards college and career readiness, we have shared our expectations for meeting and making progress towards grade level standards during Meet and Greet Night with parents. We are working to improve our communication with the parents by developing class websites (it is our goal for all teachers to share websites with the parents for the new year) and engaging them in fun activities during Parent Engagement Tuesdays. During some of these activities, we will keep parents/families abreast of their children’s progress and any other salient information that they need to know. In focusing on more parent engagement activities this upcoming year, our goal is to steadily increase parent attendance in parent engagement activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 35% of parents in each grade will participate in 2 out of 4 parent engagement activities as evidenced by the parent sign-in sheets. This will show an increase of 5% from the previous year. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  During Parent Engagement Tuesdays, teachers will plan activities for parents, work on creating a newsletter; complete progress reports and update information on the School APP Parents/families September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Principal Parent Coordinator will plan workshops related to the Common Core standards. Teachers will also engage parents in activities related to the curriculum during Parent Engagement Tuesdays Parents/families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers will meet with parents at Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays and other convenient times to inform parents of student progress Parents/families September 2017-June 2019 Teachers Newsletters will provide parents with specific information and keep parents informed on what’s taking place in the classroom. Parents/families and Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. LEAP, Woodwind Your Family Inc Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Parent Coordinator to conduct workshops ● Funding for parent activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, the data for Parent Engagement Activities will be analyzed for increased parent attendance ● Parent coordinator will send out flyers to parents informing them about Parent Engagement activities. Parents will also be kept up to date via the School APP. ● Teachers will plan and conduct activities Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Sign -In sheets for Parent Engagement activities will be utilized to determine progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-3 – Students scoring between 0% – 74% on Beginning of the Year Baseline Assessment Gr 4- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut off score on the 3 rd grade NYS ELA test. Gr 5- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut on the 4 th grade NYS ELA test. K-3 – Students scoring between 0% – 74% on Beginning of the Year Go Math Beginning of the Year Assessment Gr 4- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut scores on the 3 rd grade NYS Math test. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier I Interventions: Differentiated Instruction, Read- Alouds, Shared Inquiry; Compass Learning/Pathblazersprogram. Tier II Interventions : Repeated Reading, Interactive Read-Alouds, Guided Reading, Teacher-Student Conferences; Compass Learning/Pathblazers program. Tier III Interventions : Great Leaps, Reading Rescue, Reading Partners Tier I Interventions: Cooperative Problem Solving, Tiered Tasks Fluency Activities; Compass Learning/Pathblazersprogram. Tier II Interventions : Re-teaching small group instruction; use of manipulatives; increased and focused vocabulary instruction and concept development; Tier I – small group in the classroom; Individual Tier II - targeted small group in the classroom; Individual Tier III - targeted small group or one to one tutoring by a teacher, paraprofessional or Reading Rescue and Reading Partner teaching professional who pulls students out Tier I – small group in the classroom; Individual Tier II - targeted small group in the classroom; Individual Tier III - targeted small group or one to one tutoring by a teacher Tier I – During the school day Tier II - During the school day Tier III - During the school day Tier I – During the school day Tier II - During the school day Tier III - During the school day 2018-19 CEP 32 Compass Learning/Pathblazersprogram. Tier III Interventions : Re-teaching individual content and prerequisite knowledge Integrating Nonfiction text through literacy Same as above Small Group/One to One During the school Day Same as above Integrating Nonfiction text Small Group/One to One During the school Day through literacy Same as above Same as above Science Social Studies Gr 5- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut scores on the 4 th grade NYS Math test. K-3 – Students scoring between 0% – 74% on Beginning of the Year Baseline Assessment Gr 4- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut off score on the 3 rd grade NYS ELA test. Gr 5- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut on the 4 th grade NYS ELA test. K-3 – Students scoring between 0% – 74% on Beginning of the Year Baseline Assessment Gr 4- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut off score on the 3 rd grade NYS ELA test. Gr 5- Students whose scale scores on the 2017NYS ELA test fall below the level 2 cut on the 4 th grade NYS ELA test. 2018-19 CEP 33  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students whose parents agree to at-risk counseling as per recommendation of teacher/staff. At-risk Counseling Small group and one to one During the school Day 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. For the 2018-2019 school year we will conduct the following activities: - Assign students to Success Mentors for Counseling - Provide a beginning of the school year Care Pack (backpack with supplies) - Give Attendance Incentives - Bi-weekly check-ins with parents/guardians by Parent Coordinator and Success Mentors - Give recognition for improvement in Academics, Attendance and behavior -Plan Parent/Child activities - trips luncheons etc Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35 We are planning to purchase the supplies that are most needed like uniforms and school supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● School administration will work with the Network’s HR liaison to ensure that all teachers are highly qualified ● Form partnerships with local colleges to identify new staff ● Attend Central borough wide hiring fairs 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform initiatives ● Integrate professional development for monolingual and bilingual/ENL staff into the ongoing instructional activities of the school, for example, through multidisciplinary planning, common preparation periods, and locally designed professional support. Topics for the Professional Learning Cycles include using data to help students build mental math and computation strategies; support struggling readers with specific targeted strategies to improve their reading; plan rigorous performance tasks in Social Studies that align to the writing genres and identify the priority skills for the NYS State tests. ● Involve parents in their children’s education through greater collaboration with teachers and other school staff in order to increase engagement in the school’s education program Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Set up a Pre-K & K Open House week to meet with parents of transitioning Pre-K – K students ● Parent Coordinator will greet parents and give them a tour of the school ● PK Social Worker will share information on curriculum, parent involvement activities, early intervention services ● Engage the parents in fun hands-on workshops relating to the curriculum 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● MOSL Team members and Principal meet to discuss the best MOSL assessments for K&1 and Grades 2-5 ● MOSL team members meet with Principal to discuss trends in assessment results from previous year ● MOSL Team members and Principal reach a consensus on best assessment options and decide on the multiple assessments that would be best to track and monitor student performance in identified areas of weakness ● MOSL Team and Principal share assessment options with the staff 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 2018-19 CEP 38  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $147,037 $41,975 0 0 $1,069,681 x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP 39  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 13K305, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [Dr. Peter Ray Elementary School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 13K305, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 43  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name Dr. Julia Mortley Borough Brooklyn School Number 305 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Julia Mortley Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joanna Wizner Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Barbara Freeman Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Vontries Holloman Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Samantha Dunn Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 182 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 15 2018-19 CEP 48 Total number of ELLs 8.24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 54.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 3 4 K 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The instructional planning for ELLs at PS 305 is guided by formative assessments and curriculum-embedded assessments. Our schools uses end of the unit assessments from Ready Gen and Go Math and Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessment. The F&P assessment tool is our baseline and provides insights regarding individual strengths and weaknesses of the students. The data shows that only two of our ELL students are at the grade reading level including one that is exceeding the grade expectation for a whole year. Most of our ELLs started the year below the grade levels however, our students are mostly on the beginning level of the language acquisition. In the effort to bridge the gap, the teachers and the students will focus more on vocabulary development and reading/ writing skills therefore we are confident our ELL students will soon show a steady improvement. The data serves in aiding instruction and setting teacher/student goals to meet the linguistic, cultural and educational needs of all ELLs. There are teacher created assessments and many informal classroom practices such as observational checklists, journals, peer assessments, self-checklists, graphic organizers, academic conversations to explain new learning, exit slips etc. The data compiled from these assessments help measure students’ growth and weaknesses in both in 2018-19 CEP 49  learning content or skills and in developing the English language. This enables our teachers to monitor students’ progress and use the assessment information to design an appropriate instructional plan for the future. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? At PS 305 all teachers attend team meetings to analyze assessment data and plan for all students. They collaborate to establish common goals, develop instructional plan for each grade level and devise different teaching strategies for students with different abilities. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to identify baseline, progress and areas of need PS 305 uses Fountas and Pinnell baseline assessment, MOSL Performance tasks, and Ready benchmark assessment. State assessments such as ELA, Math, Science exams measure students’ growth in attaining the skills and knowledge defined by Common Core Standards. Our school is responsible for making an Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) to make sure that all students including our ELL meet or exceed the measurable objectives set by the state for each year. For ELLs in particular, the NYSESLAT exam allows us to track their movement from one language proficiency to another and across all language modalities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative assessments provide the administrators and teachers with data on students’ learning at PS 305. They enable us to make thoughtful decisions about which student groups to target, how to prioritize and plan future instruction, and inform what resources, interventions or accommodations we should use to meet our students’ needs. The NYSESLAT scores inform the teachers how to group ELL students according to their proficiency level and to ensure that they receive mandated number of instruction minutes in standalone and integrated ENL setting. Former ELLs receive English language support for two more years after they exit the ELL program. Once the Language Proficiency Team (LPT) identifies students with special needs, they receive accommodations according to their IEPs and our school provides intervention specialists such as Speech therapist, OT instructor, and SETTS teacher. There are also after-school programs available to all students that support them in developing skills necessary to succeed at school. Members of the school community also attend professional developments during PD Mondays as well as outside of the building to grow professionally, improve the quality of classroom instruction and put to work some research-validated strategies. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students at P.S. 305, including the ELLs, undergo the universal screening assessment that identifies students who may be at risk of not meeting the standards through benchmarks and assessments. The first one is the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) that informs the teachers about the linguistic factors and educational background that could be influencing the student and their teaching instruction. When students are in need for ESL/ENL services, the literacy skills are also assessed so that the students could also receive high quality instructional support in the general classroom. If, in spite of strong core instruction, the student is not showing much progress, the data is used to identify the areas that need more intensive, targeted intervention. Progress is constantly monitored and used to inform the instruction, and to make educational decisions about rendering additional special education services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At PS 305, we use ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) which helps us make data driven decisions regarding our ELLs. This tool yields information such as years of service, ELA/Math performance and progress, NYSESLAT proficiency and progress, disability classification, holdover status etc. This allows us to focus on the ELLs and their progress to achieve language proficiency so that we can design necessary interventions and instructional programs for them. This program also identifies students who are at-risk using “At-Risk indicators” so that we can service those students with more targeted interventions. P.S. 305 uses EDAT to self-evaluate, review and implement our plans and goals to strengthen our ENL program and to improve academic outcomes for our ELLs. Our school is also held responsible for making adequate Annual Yearly Progress to make sure that all ELLs meet 2018-19 CEP 50  the states ‘proficiency level of achievement on the state academic assessment. In addition, students need to make the Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives (AMAO). Our ELLs receive content area instruction in the general classroom where high-expectations are set. Formative and summative assessments identify individual needs and are used to guide instruction. The school uses data for each student in order to calculate growth in language proficiency from year to year. The progress of the former ELLs is also monitored to provide additional help and support if necessary. Every year the NYSESLAT provides insight into student gains and proficiency levels. This year, one of our students tested out as he moved to Commanding level of language of language proficiency. One Kindergarten student moved up to Expanding level, and we also have two students who moved to this level into the second grade. Four other students moved into the transitioning level. The majority of our ELL population consists of the newcomers who need additional time and support to develop their skills and move from the Emerging level. Apart from the state standardized tests, the teachers use also the informal assessments to track the success of ELLs in the classroom. The other common practices are performance-based assessment and portfolio assessment. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Any assessment data analyses are disseminated in order to make adjustments to our programs. We share our findings with the administrators and teachers during common PDs and team meetings. with the administrators and teachers during common PDs and team meetings. Ms. Wizner, the ENL teacher provides documents and reports (RLAT) to make sure that ENL data and language proficiency levels are known to classroom teachers of ELLS. There are ongoing productive conversations and lesson planning opportunities during which the ELL teachers discuss the findings and propose adjustments to the program and instruction. Also, during parents’ meetings and parent-teacher conferences, parents and guardians of ELLs are being informed about their child’s progress and any new data findings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. As per CR Part 154.2, P.S. 305 implements an organizational model of two settings: Integrated and Standalone ENL for a Freestanding English as a New Language program. In Integrated ENL, the content area subject is co-taught by the general education teacher (content core certified), and a certified ENL teacher who uses ENL methodologies to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support in the instruction. Standalone ENL is delivered in a pull-out session. It is delivered by our ENL teacher who helps the students develop English language skills needed for academic success in core content classes. The language of instruction in both settings is English. Integrated ENL uses a block, push-in model where all of the ELL students are grouped in one class of one grade. Standalone ENL follows an ungraded model where ELL students are brought together from various classrooms. The grade span in one standalone ENL group doesn’t exceed two continuous grades. In both settings, ELL students are grouped heterogeneously with mixed proficiency levels so that the more proficient students could provide support to those who need extra help. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 51  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In 2016-2017, there were 17 students from K-5 grades at our school. They ranged from the Entering to Commanding levels, and according to their language proficiency level, they received either one unit of study per week (180 minutes) or two units of study per week (360 minutes) of ENL. To remain In compliance with CR Part 154, our Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, and Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes as well. Explicitly, the students who are on the Entering level receive 1 unit of study in Stand-Alone ENL (180 minutes) and 1 unit of study in Integrated ENL/ELA (180 minutes). For the students on Emerging level, receive 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL, 180 minutes in Integrated ENL/ELA and additional 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL where there is a flexibility to choose from Stand-Alone ENL, Integrated ENL/Core Content Area. Students who are at the Transitioning level of language proficiency receive only 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and only 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL or Core Content Area. Students who are at the Expanding level receive one unit of study in Integrated ENL/ELA or Core Content Area. Students who achieved Commanding language proficiency level on the NYSESLAT are considered former ELLs however, they must receive 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL in ELA or Core Content Area for 2 years after testing out. This year there is one former ELL at P.S. 305. All ENL students receive the same academic content as those students who are native English speakers so that ELL students could achieve proficiency and attain the standards established for all students for a grade promotion and graduation. Therefore, at PS 305, ELL students receive Reading and Writing workshops which totals 405 minutes a week. According to the grade, all P.S 305 students receive either one period of Math every day, around 450 minutes per week. All students receive three periods of 45 minutes of Science and Social Studies a week. They receive required instruction in one Technology class, and this year the teachers also integrate the Art and Music and Physical Education into their everyday curriculum. In those content areas the teachers working with the language needs of ELLs modify and scaffold their instructional language foe ELL students. The school directly provides or makes referrals to appropriate support services, and utilize instructional methods that are appropriate for ELL students in order to achieve and maintain satisfactory level of academic performance. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to help ENL students achieve proficiency in language and academics so that they could attain the same standards established for all students at each grade level, the Articulation Forms are filled out monthly by the classroom teachers, and curriculum overview maps are shared. They serve as communication between ESL teacher and content area teachers to plan ENL curriculum and activities for each grade level. There is also pre-planning cooperation between the two teachers during common prep times, or communicated via e-mails. All English Language Learners (ELLs) are instructed in English using Total Physical Response, Cooperative Learning and Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach. In the classroom many different practices are utilized such as: Scaffolding, Modeling, Bridging, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation. The ESL classroom materials include Scott Foresman ENL book series that follow the principles of CALLA: the Cognitive Academic Language Approach. It teaches grade-level topics from the major curriculum areas, and Prentice Hall Regents ESL which is literature- based language acquisition program that incorporates Science, Social studies and Math altogether. Also, Ms. Wizner uses Language Power- Building Language Proficiency book series that consist of level-appropriate texts and rigorous instruction practice books that support content-area literacy and language development. With regards to native language support in the ENL program, the word wall often includes word native language translations and cognates. The students also use dictionaries and glossaries, same language speaking peer support, native language library books, and international websites. The teacher uses Informal assessments and running records almost on everyday basis. Beyond explicit ENL, General Education teachers are concerned with the language needs of ELLs. Therefore, they constantly monitor students’ understanding of linguistically challenging material, and utilize the ELL targeted parts of the Ready Gen program, and Go Math! program. They use a shared reading module, a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning, and scaffold the instruction with visual aids such as maps, illustrations, and graphic organizers to increase comprehension. If possible, the students are paired-up with an English proficient student who can assist with language translation, and help with the classroom activities during the day. Instruction is modified for newcomers by focusing on building vocabulary, developing listening comprehension, modeling reading and writing using visuals, realia, and providing active contextualized engagement activities. A combination of different new language acquisition strategies (The Natural Approach, TPR, scaffolding) are used to 2018-19 CEP 52  introduce the students to school routines and to basic English language skills. In the testing grades the students utilize translated glossaries for Mathematics, Social Studies and Science, available also on the ALBETAC website. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning of their first year at school, students and their parents are informally interviewed to gather information about the students’ background. Those who speak Spanish at home and score at or below proficiency level on the NYSITELL are also administered Spanish LAB-R to determine language dominance. If eligible, students receive English as a New Language Instruction throughout the year helping them achieve the academic goals and to close the gap between them and their English speaking peers. In regards to language, all ENL students have an access to native language materials that provide support during the daily activities, and the testing accommodations such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, the use of English and alternate language editions of the test or the oral test translation. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) This year PS 305 has no SIFE students. During the interview that is part of the identification process, the student is given an Oral Interview Questionnaire, and the questions about family and home background, education history, and language and literacy practices questions are asked. The interview also includes student’s work samples to determine level in math and in home language. For Spanish speakers there is Literacy Evaluation for Newcomers SIFE (LENS) available online. This diagnostic tool helps the teachers become familiar with the new student’s strengths and weaknesses regarding literacy and math skills enabling them successfully plan for instruction. Once SIFE students are identified, P.S. 305 would make the individual needs assessment with the attention to their learning gaps in the instruction, monitor the progress of those students and their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments, and provide support in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. One of the options is to place such a student in a lower grade. This would be done on a case by case basis and with informed parental consent. Also, P.S. 305 would make available all existing support structures such as Extended Day, or Speech and Language services which could benefit the student. Once the student achieves transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT, this ELL student is no longer considered SIFE. b) Newcomers are students who are being serviced 0-3 years, very often have recently immigrated and have very limited English language skills but also students who were born in the U.S. and score at the emerging, transitioning or higher levels. Students at P.S. 305 however, are usually at the Pre-Production and Early Production stage of Second Language Acquisition. When a new ELL student is registered in our school, we provide an informal student orientation. An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. There is an ongoing home- school communication. If possible, the student is paired-up with the student who can assist with language translation and help with the classroom activities during the day. Instruction is modified for newcomers by focusing on building vocabulary, developing listening comprehension, modeling reading and writing using visuals, realia, and providing active contextualized engagement activities. A combination of different second language acquisition strategies (The Natural Approach, TPR, scaffolding) are used to introduce the students to school routines and to basic English language skills. At this stage, our teachers may utilize visuals and hands-on activities to ensure the student’s understanding of content area subjects while the student is acquiring English. The newcomers who have been in the U.S. schools for less than three years are provided with a variety of strategies and materials are used to aid their instruction: scaffolding, picture dictionaries, photo cards, realia, and manipulatives. Newcomers have access to computer assisted language learning software (Kidspirations, FunPhonics) that provides them with the basic reading and comprehension skills. All ELLs have access to web-based programs (HearBuilder, Fun Brain, and Starfall). We also provide a small collection of bilingual/native language reading books in the classrooms with ELLs and in the ENL library that newcomers can check out to take home. Additionally, because NCLB requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, the instructional plan is used to maximize opportunities for ELLs to acquire language and concepts by differentiating instruction and a variety of scaffolding techniques to meet the needs of students. Teachers encourage ELLs to use bilingual dictionaries for native language support during reading and writing activities in order to clarify meaning and to develop their writing skills in their native language so they can transfer these skills when they are writing in English. Beginners are paired with English speakers who can provide good 2018-19 CEP 53  modeling during the Small Group Instruction students are learning and practicing reading comprehension strategies (summarizing, sequencing, inferring, comparing and contrasting, drawing conclusions, self-questioning, problem solving, relating background knowledge, distinguishing between fact and opinion, finding the main idea). c) ELLs receiving service from 4-6 years (Developing ELLs), are mostly at the Intermediate or Advanced language proficiency level. Instruction for those students will focus on activities that are designed to develop higher level of language use in the content areas, expanding vocabulary, explicating teaching reading comprehension strategies, scaffolding academic language, modeling a think aloud verbalizing a confusing point. The writing process is broken down into stages. This process always starts with brainstorming activities that are visually displayed via graphic organizers. Grammar, spelling and punctuation rules are taught, as well as, the format for writing essays, reports, poetry and letters. d) The instruction for students who completed 6 years of ENL (Long term Students) is especially focused on immersing them in a print-filled environment, providing context-enriching activities, engaging students in small group activities, providing multiple opportunities for students to learn. In addition to the support received in ENL program, those students are required to participate in Extended Day program and Small Group Instruction. They are provided with the support that prepares them to participate in NYS assessments (e.g. ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies). Students work in small groups with their classroom teachers targeting specific areas of need. In addition, word to word dictionaries and glossaries are in place to support them during the tests. Same support structures are provided. e) After reaching proficiency/Commanding level or scoring at the Advance/Expanding level on the NYSESLAT with testing at level 3 or 4 on the ELA, ELL students become former ELLs but, according to a new CP Part 154, they are to receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL up to 2 years after testing out. Also, school districts may provide other services that would monitor and support their language development and academic progress. As such, former ELLs continue to receive language acquisition support to consolidate and further develop their English language skills in different content areas. Their instruction is enriched with academic English language development and focused on reading and writing skills. The ENL teacher will work closely with the content teachers to create an action plan that will help address any areas where the former ELL might still need assistance. Teachers will monitor the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs and will design many collaborative tasks that target content and generate interactions among students. Students will work in small groups with their classroom teachers targeting specific areas of need. Former ELLS are illegible not only for transition support, but also for two years more of testing accommodations that also apply for other ELLs. Testing accommodations for LEP/ELLs students on NYS ELA and content area assessments include time extension, separate location, bilingual dictionaries or glossaries, oral translation of low incidence languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our special needs ELLs receive services from our licensed ENL teacher and support services as per their IEP. This enables us to meet the needs of this specific population by allowing for a majority of instruction to occur in small groups. Based on the individual, ENL strategies and instructional methods are utilized. Lessons for students with special needs are modified to address different learning styles, incorporating assistive technology and using a variety of scaffolding techniques and modifying lessons to address different learning styles. As a policy for special needs students we ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. The ENL teacher converses and collaborates with the IEP contact person. In addition, all the newcomers and SIFE students are constantly monitored for possible special needs status. P.S. 305 students with special needs are integrated in the mainstream ENL program and put under the supervision of the teacher and school Health Coordinator. Our school uses the comprehensive researched based program for grades K-5, Ready Gen. It contains precisely leveled, print based learning and teaching resources combined with many additional materials like "Scaffolded Strategies" handbook with Spanish cognates that support language and literacy proficiency for ELLs. It also provides an ELL component that supports the class curriculum and provides ELLs with scaffolded instruction. All the grades are using also Go Math! program. Teachers use differentiated instruction and utilize visuals, different graphic organizers, and hands-on activities to ensure the students’ understanding of content area subjects while acquiring English. Everyday there is small class instruction and writing activities. Students also use technology support with Smart Boards, laptops and online resources. ENL students who achieved English language proficiency continue receiving transitional support and are permitted to have testing accommodations for up to two years after testing out on the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 CEP 54  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? During the Integrated ENL instruction, the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to provide our ELL-SWDS with technical support, and ESL strategies to develop their reading and writing skills while working with content based materials that are aligned with the State Standards. The teachers use and share their curriculum maps which include modifications for ELL, and meet during the common preps. The ENL teacher also uses the Articulation Forms, common prep time for pre-planning and e-mails as the means of communication with classroom teachers in an effort to maintain alignment of curricula across the grades with the ENL instruction during the Integrated ENL. The goal is to plan on their instructional and educational strategies as a grade team and to collaborate with auxiliary staff members. For the Stand-Alone ENL session, they are pulled out of the classroom and receive the proper amount of ENL services together with other peers to ensure development their language skills needed to succeed in content subjects. Vertical groups meet across a grade once a week to look at students’ work. Inquiry team works on compiling the students’ data and using them to target the students showing deficiencies in their learning. In order to ensure that flexible programming is used to maximize time of ELL students with disabilities (SWDs) spent with their non-disabled peers the Integrated Co-Teaching classrooms are opened, and all school curricular and extracurricular programs are available to all students including SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLS in ELA, math, and other content areas involve cluster teachers who serve as Academic Intervention Specialists to help classroom teachers as well as students in all areas that need improvements. Tier II interventions include ENL teacher, SETTS teacher, Guidance Counselor and Speech Therapist. The language of instruction is English. The translators over the phone or our bilingual paras are used for translations if necessary. IEP evaluations and parent teachers meetings are conducted for our students with special needs. This year our ESL/ENL classroom utilized a new interventional program "Sounds in motion" to provide early literacy training to students need to improve their phonemic awareness and literacy-based language skills, both oral and written. Apart from ENL program and other intervention programs the classroom teachers are concerned with the language needs of ELLs, constantly monitor students’ understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning, and scaffold the instruction with visual aids such as maps, and illustrations to increase comprehension. We use Guided reading, and vocabulary quizzes to make instruction more involving and effective. Instruction is modified for newcomers by focusing on building vocabulary, developing listening comprehension, modeling reading and writing using visuals, realia, and providing active contextualized engagement activities. A combination of different second language acquisition strategies (The Natural Approach, TPR, scaffolding) are used to introduce the students to school routines and to basic English language skills. In the testing grades the students utilize translated glossaries for Mathematics, Social Studies and Science, available also on the ALBETAC website. There is MyON, a leveled reading computerized program, and IReady Math and Reading program to help our Tier II students. In order to support our Tier II students, our schools invited Reading Partners and Reading Rescue teams to focus on their academic needs and skills development in reading. During Social Studies and Science, the teachers often use small group instruction or one-on-one conferences to address the needs of individual student. They take low inference and informal observation notes on a daily basis. All of the intervention programs for ELA, Math and other content areas are offered in English but with the native language support whenever needed. For the state tests in Math and Science, the translated versions and glossaries are available. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year PS. 305 has won the Participatory Budget contest. The members of our community have decided that significant amount of money is going to be assigned to fund more technology equipment for our school. We plan on purchasing new SMART boards which means new programs and resources coming to every and each classroom. Also, Move to Improve program will be incorporated into our daily routines and lessons. It is a free physical-activity program that supports active learning environment in the classroom. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs at PS 305 participate in curricular ReadyGen and Go Math! programs. They have an equal access to all afterschool programs and supplemental services offered in our building. Also, Tier III intervention specialists who serve all the students and their parents include guidance counselor, family worker, parent coordinator, occupational therapist, physical therapist, speech and language therapist, social worker, and psychologist. Moreover, the students take part in the community building activities; enjoy participation in our basketball team, peer mediators conflict resolution, student government and Safety Patrol and PAL. Some of former and present ELL students have been chosen to be part of the Student Government and are represented regularly on the Principal's Honor Roll List. Whenever needed, ELL parents are provided with the fliers that are in their native languages, they have an access to the Translation and Interpretation Services, and the documents in their native languages. Interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. GoMath, New York State Coach: ELA, New York State Coach: Mathematics. Moreover, students are provided with prentice Hall regents ESL, Scott Foresman ESL, Language Power-Building Language Proficiency book series, Spin by Longman, American English Today, Amazing English books, and the classroom library books. With the assistance of the stationary computer programs (Kidspirations, FunPhonics), Internet sources (HearBuilder,Starfall), and listening tapes, the students develop their skills in phonics, reading, vocabulary, listening, writing and math. Because of the low number of ELL population at our school, we don't receive Title III funding. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In order to deliver native language support, reading levels labeled language books, the picture dictionaries, Webster dictionaries as well as Bilingual dictionaries are often used during the ENL instruction. We also provide a small collection of bilingual/native language reading books in the ENL classroom library that students can check out to take home. This year the teachers also used the online translations application to better communication between the teacher and the newcomers. The bilingual dictionaries and translated glossaries are available as a classroom resource, and may be provided as an accommodation when taking State examinations, and also, the Department of Education may provide them with the translated editions of some tests. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support, materials and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. The services provide support needed by ENL students to achieve and maintain a satisfactory level of academic performance. ENL teacher seek to offer support primarily during the Language Arts block, but students also receive support during content-area times for subjects such as Math, Science or Social Studies. ELLs acquire and develop English language skills while meeting their grade and age level standards in core subjects. Services and resources are also adapted to make it more appropriate for ELLs and our SWDs and according to their cognitive needs. We use curricural, instructional and scheduling flexibility so that these students can reach their IEP’s goals and attain English proficiency. ELL students are assessed on an ongoing basis with the help of school-wide assessments and HearBuilder program to drive teaching goals and instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In order to ensure that the student's academic, social/emotional and second language development is included in instructional decisions, teachers match the curriculum with the student's assessment data, background experience, oral language and vocabulary. They use language during the instruction that is comprehensive and meaningful to ELLs, using slower but natural rate of speech and often rephrase and repeat instruction while using pictures, concrete objects and videos in order to support student's learning. Teachers also make sure that they build on the student's background knowledge and provide the opportunities to work with the peers who speak the native language. Language native supports used in the classrooms also include online google translators, glossaries, and a small collection of word to word dictionaries and native language books in the ESL/ENL classroom. During the lesson, teachers make sure to explicitly teach key vocabulary words and review main points and ideas supported with graphic organizers, charts and other visuals to support comprehension. 2018-19 CEP 56  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our ELL population is quite small. As such, we conduct orientations with the parents as they enroll their children and after the child is identified as an eligible candidate for ENL instructional services. In order to ensure the identification, the appropriate placement and educational services for the children, on the day of registration, all of the parents are initially interviewed one-on-one, and given a Home Language Survey (HLIS) by the licensed pedagogue, the teacher with an ENL license and the secretary. In case of the language barrier, school staff members serve as translators or Translation and Interpretation Unit is called. HLIS are distributed according to home languages of the parents. After the informal interview, initial screening and HLIS administration, the child is or is not identified as an eligible candidate for ENL instructional services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P.S.305 holds weekly Professional Development sessions that provide professional and instructional support to the entire school staff. Those meetings offer workshops on differentiated instruction, Common Core Standards, Universal Design Learning and DOE’s expectations in the areas of Literacy and Math. Our ELA Professional Development is based on the needs of the students and teachers. It is data driven and focused on improving teacher craft and students’ areas of weakness. Professional development is provided by school staff and Community Learning Support personnel organization. They focus on: scaffolding in the content areas, differentiation in the ENL classroom, ENL in the Mathematics classroom. Academic Intervention Specialists and ENL teacher go in the classrooms and provide professional support to the teachers of ELLs. ENL teacher participates in Regional Professional Development sessions, Office of English Language Learners PDs, Technical support sessions (LAP, BESIS) as well as faculty and grade conferences. In addition, our grade leaders and subject facilitators in ELA and Math participate in vertical meetings across the grades to strengthen the instruction and practices that ensure student academic success. Office of English Language Learners (OELL) and the Brooklyn North Borough Field Support Center offer a range of professional learning opportunities in collaboration with the New York City Department of Education (NYC DOE) Division of English Language Learners and Students Support Services. These workshops and presentations give participants a variety of targeted professional learning opportunities focusing on research based, optimum educational practices and methodologies to ensure the achievement of biliteracy skills, academic success as well as college and career readiness among ELLs and bilingual learners. They share many ELL -related professional development opportunities and educational resources that support ELL teachers as they engage in the Common Core learning Standards. Additionally, Pearson Ready Gen and Go Math! programs offer workshops and training sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 CEP 57  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School Name: Dr.Peter Ray Elementary School School DBN: 13K305 School Name: Dr.Peter Ray Elementary School School DBN: 13K305 Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 305 provides individual meetings with parents or guardians of ELLs at least once a year, in addition to other generally required meetings to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Those meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Interpretation and translations are provided as needed by para, teacher or through the DOE’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents of PS 305 students are encouraged to be partners in their child’s education at home and in school. We rely on parent support to ensure student success. It is our practice to provide regular opportunities for parents to participate in workshops on topics they have identified as relevant and of interest through surveys and informal assessment. We attempt to provide meaningful communication through the school calendar, website, email, backpacked notices and phone calls. At P.S. 305 parents of newly enrolled students are provided with an orientation session on the State Standards, assessments, school expectations and the general program requirements of our ENL program. Also, all ELLs are invited to three informational meetings as required under Part 154; they meet with an ELL teacher during the School Open Night, Parent- Teacher Conferences and during an individual, informational meeting sometime in the middle of a school year. These meetings provide information on ELA/ ESL and Math Standards and Assessment, and later in the school year on NYSESLAT Assessment and Promotional Policy. Whenever needed, ELL parents are provided with an access to the Translation and Interpretation Services, and the documents in their native languages. Interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents, and the Parent Coordinator serves as a Language Assistance Coordinator and she makes sure that all correspondence between the school and the parents is translated into the appropriate languages. The school regularly plans activities that involve the families in the school community such as several parent/child activities that are jointly planned by the Parent Teachers Association and the Parent Coordinator. Incentives such as Earning Scholar Dollars for child are offered to attend workshops and PTA Meetings that focus on family literacy services. This helps them improve their understanding of the curriculum and assist families in supporting their child’s education, or develop life skills that will improve the family life for our students. PS 305 also offers the following family engagement activities; family Health Fairs, Parent Make and Take Workshops, Parenting Classes Parent Information sessions. All workshops are organized by the Parent Coordinator whose role includes the following responsibilities; Providing family and community outreach, Promoting family and community engagement, Working with the school's PTA and partnering with local agencies to provide family and community services. Information about community resources and support services are available for parents in the parent room. During the meetings and workshops there is a licensed pedagogue who serves as an onsite Spanish interpreter. Our Arabic parents usually provide their own interpreters, family or friends who translate for them; there is also over the phone translation available through Translation and Interpretation Services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 58  Number of ELLs by Subgroups: All ELLs 16 Newcomers (ELLs receiving service 0-3 years) 17 ELL Students with Disabilities 0 SIFE 0 Developing ELLs (ELLs receiving service 4-6 years) 0 Long-Term (ELLs receiving service 7 or more years) 0 Number of ELLs by Grade in Each Language Group: K 1 2 3 4 5 TOTAL Spanish 2 17 Chinese Russian Bengali Urdu Arabic 2 2 2 4 4 Haitian Other 1 OVERALL NYSESLAT* PROFICIENCY RESULTS (*NYSITELL FOR NEW ADMITS): Grades: K 1 2 3 4 5 Entering(Beginning) 3 1 1 3 Emerging(Low Intermediate) 1 Transitioning(High Intermediate) 1 1 2 Expanding(Advanced) 1 2 Commanding(Proficient) 1 Total 17 2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Julia Mortley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 305 School DBN: 13K305 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Julia Mortley Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Samantha Dunn Parent Coordinator Joanna Wizner ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Vontries Holloman School Counselor Barbara Freeman N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K305 School Name: Dr. Peter Ray Elementary School Superintendent: Barbara Freeman The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Students Registration form and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is provided to all of our parents upon the registration at the school. Right there, in the office, parents are notified about all the translation services available: the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit, and Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services, and also our multi-speaking stuff. During the process of registration the interview is conducted by one of our pedagogues as for the parent language preference and choice. The Home Language Identification Survey Part III contains a question informing the administration, and school stuff about the parents' communication language preference. This information can later be accessed in the ATS system using the Home Language report (RHLA), Citywide/District Parents’ Preferred Language Report (RCPL), School Level Emergency Contact Form (RECF)5, School Level Emergency Contact Student List (RCON), School Level Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL), School Level Adult Detail Report (RADL), and on the blue emergency contact cards located in the main office. The ATS Home Language Report is generated monthly to ensure that it is updated. 2018-19 CEP 62  The ELL Parent Information Kit (EPIC) which contains documents available in several languages is placed in a designated cabinet in ESL classroom, and it is also available at the DOE website: http://schools.nyc.go/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/Parent+Information.htm 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Out of 200 parents in PS 305, we have 4 that speak Spanish language, 10 who speak Arabic, and 22 speak the languages that are not specified. All of them require written stranslation and interpretation and the data is shared with our school community during the PTA meetings, school conferences, and school-wide events. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 63  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Upon registration, the school provides the new parents with the Home Language Identyfication Survey (HLIS), the blue emergency contact cards and Parent Student Ethnic Identification form, and Media Consent form that are available in the language preferred by the parents. There are also forms for Admissions, Re-admissions, Transfer and List Notice for all students, Residency forms, Complaint Procedure documents, Health forms such as Immunization records forms translated and available if it deems necessary. Parents are notified in timely fashion whether their child has or not been eligible for NYSITELL testing, informed about the NYSITELL results, and about the Parent-Teacher Orientation session for the parents of the newly enrolled students through the parent notification letters sent home by an ENL teacher. The ENL teacher has an access to the ELL Parent Information Kit (EPIC) which includes: The Home Language Identification Survey, The ELL Parent Brochure, Parent Survey and program selection Form, Parent notifications (Entitlement, Non-entitlement, Continued Entitlement, Placement, and Transition letters). All of the above are available in several languages, and at the DOE website: htpp://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/EducatorResources/Parent+Information.htm. The information there is translated and delivered in each of the covered languages: Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu. In case of events such as field trips, Holidays and recess, the translated documents will be sent home. At the end of the school year the parents will receive their children handritten report cards, also in the languages they prefer. Schools can access critical documents that are already translated on the intranet at: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/TranslatedDocs Parents can access critical documents that are already translated on the DOE’s website at: http://schools.nyc.gov 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 64  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? At P.S. 305 parents of newly enrolled students are provided with an orientation session on the State Standards, assessments, school expectations and the general program requirements of our ESL program. Also, all ELLs are invited to two informational meetings as required under Part 154; they meet with an ELL teacher during the School Open Night, Parent-Teacher Conference and at a half-year informational meeting.These meetings provide information on ELA/ESL and Math Standards and Assessment, and later in the school year on NYSESLAT Assessment and Promotional Policy. The school regularly plans activities that involve the families in the school community such as several parent/child activities that are jointly planned by the Parent Teachers Association and the Parent Coordinator. Incentives such as Earning Scholar Dollars for child are offered to attend workshops and PTA Meetings that focus on family literacy services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 65  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In accordance with the Chancellor's Regulations A-663, at the entrance to PS 305 there will be a multilingual welcome poster and the signs placed to inform all of the parents about the language interpretation services being available.The signs will be made in the most prominent covered languages. The Language ID card that helps DOE staff identify the language of a limitedEnglish-proficient parent will be placed at security desk and oin the main ofiice. At present we are working on accomodating our main office, so that the parents will be provided with a copy of the translated versions of Bill Of Rights and a copy of Parent Guide to Language Access which inform them about their translation and interpretation services rights. In order to ensure that the language barrier does not prevent the ELL parents from reaching the school administration, the school safety plan will contain procedures to provide them with the most appropriate translation and interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will organize gathering the feedback from the parents on the quality and availability of services, parent survey will be designed, translated and sent to the parents.Bimonthly parent meetings are held at the local school and ELL parent concerns are addressed during each meeting. Meeting agendas reflect the topics discussed. 2018-19 CEP 66 
