2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 16K308 School Name: P.S. 308 CLARA CARDWELL Principal: SHARON ODWIN 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Clara Cardwell School 16K308 School Number (DBN): 331600010308 Pre K-8 616 Quincy St Brooklyn, NY 11221 Phone Number: Fax: 718- 571-6960 718 571-6979 Sharon Odwin sodwin@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Sharon Odwin Talib Siddiq LawannaKing Marlene Watts Ms. L. king - Mr. B. Johnson - Co - Representatives None None Javier FernandezCSD Partnership With Children. ShontaiHolllingsworth Director of New York Edge grades 6-8(Formerly Sports and Arts) Director ) Meghan Olivier Director of Sports and Arts (Elementary) New York Edge CBO Representative: Geographical District: 16 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: District Information RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 Lafayette Ave Brooklyn, NY 11221 ramon@schools.nyc.gov 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  718) 574-2834 (718) 453-1048 Phone Number: Brooklyn North FSC FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: (718) 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JavierFernandez, ShontaiHollingsworth, Meghan Hilton Taylor Andrea Richards Jean Sierra Stevenson CBO Representatives Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5 Sharon Odwin Talib Siddiq LawannaKing Marlene Watts Mr. B. John / Ms. L. King None None *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name Samantha Stevenson Sydonna Morris Mary Dyson Tia Daniels NA NA NA NA NA Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/parent Member/UFT Member/parent Member/ parent/ Secretary Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview It is our mission at PS/IS 308 to provide our students with the necessary opportunities , resources, and socio-emotional support to become lifelong learners in an ever changing global society. With appropriate direction in a nurturing learning environment, our students will learn and achieve at high levels. The positive learning environment begins in the classroom with high expectations, solid lessons that are the result of keen lesson planning with an infusion of cultural awareness and respect for all. Honoring cultural differences within the classroom will generate greater buy in by students that will lead to motivation and investment of school protocol and as a recognizable lived experience unique to them leading to the classroom becoming a happier place of learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/IS 308 is a K-8 school located in the Bedford Stuyvesant area of Brooklyn, New York. It is a Brownstone neighborhood with deep cultural and historic roots. PS/IS 308 was once the pride of Bedford Stuyvesant however in the light of challenges faced by our community, it continues to be a place where students can not only grow, but benefit from a creative environment that allows them to express their talents through a variety of mediums connected to their curriculum. Celebrating culture and diversity through the Arts, we embrace the rich history of our community. Not only are parents welcomed into our school, they are drawn to our rich historic legacy of excellence with a warm sense of community. As we rebuild, we create goals for our students to excel both inside and out of the classroom setting. We expose our students to the highest level of technology in our state-of-the-art computer lab, newly renovated library and provide unique enrichment opportunities, such as our SHSAT Preparatory Courses, Foreign Languages, Taekwondo, Animation Club, Music, sponsored by Vans, Art, Stem Academy and a resurgence of our regents program. The Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation, currently known as New York Edge, offers middle school students a multitude of engaging after school activities such as STEM, Coding, Culinary Arts, Sports, Leadership, Academic Intervention, Mentoring, Dance and Art Clubs. It is our aspiration to promote a lifelong passion for learning for all at PS/IS 308. This school year, we will focus on planning and preparation, while building a positive school culture implementing culturally responsive teaching. The impact will be seen in teachers planning lessons which recognizes cultural differences and similarities in the students they teach. The impact for teachers will be found in the improvement in their abilities to develop cultural awareness, beliefs and attitudes when teaching diverse groups of student and an increase of teacher efficacy. . Our instructional focus includes the design and delivery of lessons through explicit instruction with embedded checks for understanding where students will demonstrate mastery independently. Culturally responsive teaching will help to minimize the achievement gap that exist between students with diverse needs; deepening teacher knowledge about themselves and produce an understanding of the pedagogy that benefits students of diverse backgrounds. During the 2017-2018 school year PS /IS 308 yielded an 8% increase in students performing at levels 3 and 4 and a 6% gain in students performing at levels 3 and 4 in math . To date 20% of our students are performing at grade level in ELA and 6% in math. This is an increase from 2016-2017 school year. Students with disabilities performing on grade level have increase by 2% from 0% in the previous year. Students will improve their conceptual understanding and problem solving skills in mathematics as we continue using various scaffolds that support learning. (UPS Check Tool, CUBES and the Box Method) The UPS, Box Method and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  CUBES are graphic organizers that help with deconstructing math word problems. A specific vocabulary graphic organizer will be employed to ensure students dissect unfamiliar vocabulary words in math and literacy. Creating a math inquiry group will open dialogue to investigate the root cause analysis of an identified problem of practice and find strategies that work. An Algebra for All grant has been secured which will strengthen our teacher understanding through mathematical coaching sessions to further develop teacher pedagogy. Further benefits of the Algebra for All Grant includes funding for our Success Academy and math XL an individualized computer based program. We will continue to build skills in reading and writing that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards by integrating the shifts, exposing students to complex text, building their background knowledge and having students practice using supportive evidence when making claims. Additionally, a literacy inquiry group will also investigate the root cause of why students are not reading at grade level, identify the problem and work collaboratively to find solutions. An Algebra for All math coach has been assigned to work with all teachers in planning rigorous instruction. The new 2018-2019 program contains a morning meeting where students are involved in a town hall meeting including daily discussions and a restorative justice curriculum that will yield building relationships and empowering students to make better choices. A new SSP ( School Support Personnel) is on board to support students in mentoring and leadership. PS/IS 308 strives to establish a strong school culture and environment where students feel safe. With the institution of our Student Government, students are held accountable by having a voice in decision making. There is a Town Hall meeting into the schedule, where each grade band will meet with the Student Support Personnel to discuss topics around bullying, respect for all, college and career readiness, responsible thinking, cyber-bullying, physical conditioning and grow the socio-emotional learning capacity of our scholars. During these weekly assemblies students are awarded for perfect attendance and celebrated for various accomplishments and encouraged to make good choices . The Mayor's Office initiated The Animation Project where students work with a therapist and an animator daily in creating stories with solutions using film and cartooning. Our CBO, Partnership with Children are hosting Fly Yoga, Fan 4 Kids, and Kinetic Arts which engage students in mindfulness. Moreover, PS/IS 308 teachers will actively engage in collaborative teacher team meetings building strong data competency throughout the year as they meet weekly during common planning to exchange ideas, plan together, analyze student work for the purpose of improved student achievement. The newly instituted UFT Teacher Center will serve to strengthen and support teacher pedagogy school wide. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Twenty percent of the student population at PS/IS 308 have an individualized educational plan. Over half of the students are performing two to three levels below grade level in ELA and Math. Students are struggling with conceptual understanding in mathematics and with reading comprehension in ELA. 15% of the students live in temporary housing and travel a great distance to school each morning. Attendance becomes problematic when the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  after school academic intervention programs begin and/or Saturday academic intervention services begin as many of the students who reside in temporary housing do not have access to transportation to be able to participate. Regular trauma informed care and self care workshops for staff are provided by our CBO's showing teachers how to be able to de-escalate crisis situations that may arise due to negative outburst of students. In addition, we will implement Restorative Justice practices to improve the social emotional development and behaviors within the classrooms in order to teach students how to cope with challenges. As our ENL population increases, teachers are supported by our full time ENL teacher using tier 1 strategies within the classroom structure and Tier 2 pull out approach to work with students in small groups. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to 2017-2018 NYC School Survey data completed by staff and parents progress was made in the following three areas of the Framework for Great Schools: Effective leadership, Collaborative Environment, Strong Family and Community Ties. The key focus for this school year is rigorous instruction. Strategic planning and preparation from a management trajectory to a rigorous trajectory is planned which will enhance teacher's ability to write effective lesson planning with the use of precise learning targets, monitor aggressively student progress, improve students and teacher habits of evidence and strategic questioning taken from quadrant 3 and 4 of the Depth of Knowledge Wheel all in an effort to go conceptual. We have a continued focus on student achievement by utilizing data aligned to the standards to effectively move our students towards success in ELA and Math. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. During the 2018-2019 school year, supported by the Brooklyn Field Support Center, grade band meeting will take place utilizing specific common planning protocols that would produce effective planning practices. Teachers will unpack standards and curricular, track progress of students using aggressive monitoring tools and use data for identifying specific needs and outcomes. In addition to mentoring, peer coaching will be provided by members of the Core Leadership Team in support of strengthening teacher pedagogy by working shoulder to shoulder beside their colleagues conducting and coordinating inter visitations, practice labs, demonstrations lessons and planning and preparation. An after school extended leaning time program will be geared primarily for students performing at level 1 and 2. The after Success Academy focuses on standards that students find challenging on their grade level in ELA and Math. The programs meet twice a week. After school tutors join classes to support small group and individualize tutorials. Data is collected on an on going basis to ensure students are learning. The after school Success Program is a benefit in that it gives room for re-teaching and offer individualize support to students who may need a tier 2 or 3 academic intervention service or enrichment activities. February 2019 Ivy League tutors join the staff at PS 308 to provide small group tutoring for our students designated as pushables and slippables. Saturday Success Academy will begin March 2019 to support all learners in enrichment activities and remediation. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K308 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 275 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 61 59 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 10 12 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 86.9% % Reduced Lunch 5.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 18.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.64 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 58 59 8 86.9% 1.5% 26.5% 76.4% 2.5% 1.5% 2 14% 10.5 8.9% 13% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Strengths: We are formulating a data driven culture based on student needs using data from multiple sources, we are able to create strategic action plans across grade bands that target specific standards students must master. During common planning teachers unpack standards, design and deliver explicit instruction using models in order to front load expectations of what students should know and be able to do. 2017-2018 academic ELA and Math goals were met with an 8% increase in ELA and a 6% increase in Math yielding 20% of students performing at grade level in ELA and 8% performing on grade level in math. Additionally during the 2017-2018 an increase has been shown in the number of SWD's making significant progress in ELA and Math. As of 2017-2018 there is a 3 year upward trend showing a progressive pattern of growth to 2.2% up from from 0% in previous years. 2. . Priority/Needs. Data from the 2017- 2018 school year shows a need to improve upon the instructional core which include curriculum, teacher pedagogy and assessment practices. The June Instructional report for ELA shows out of 178 students tested in grades 3-8 51% scored level 1, 29% scored level 2 , 15% scored level 3 and 5% scored level 4 in ELA. In Math 64% of the students scored level 1, 27% scored level 2, 7% scored level 3 and 5 scored level 4. To address this issue carefully we will use research based teaching practices in all classrooms to ensure that every student is engaged 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  and challenged. Explicit instruction with the use of exemplars and aggressive monitoring will be used to maximize learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 our scholars will increase their performance index as measured by formative assessments. We will increase the amount of students meeting the standards on common core aligned performance task in the State ELA and Math exam by 5%. One devise that will be utilized as a data source in monitoring items skills mastery, and standards mastery is Schoonet. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Professional Learning: Members from the BFSC will conduct a series of workshops on learning targets and lesson planning inclusive of explicit teaching with models and exemplars with all grade bands. K-2, 3-4, 6-8 Common Planning protocols will be differentiated between literacy and mathematics teachers. Teacher leaders will attend sessions on the implementation of the common core learning standards and the use of the coherency map in mathematics. Designated teacher leaders will provide differentiated professional learning sessions for specific math teachers using techniques received at the Algebra for All workshops and from the Algebra for All Math coaches . 1. K-8 math teachers 2. k-8 teachers 3. K-8 teachers 4. Cohort of teacher who are planning together/Inquiry Team Teacher Center staff developer will foster building pedagogy through teacher teams in literacy and math. The teacher center staff developer will conduct study groups on growth mindset and setting ambitious targets for improving classroom performances. 5. Teachers grades k-8 2. Teachers used the Item Skills Analysis from the 2017-2018 ELA and Math exams to identify trends and patterns school wide, as well as class specific standards with which students had the most difficulty mastering during previous school years. Teachers then modify existing units of study to reflect the needs of the students routinely evaluating the effectiveness of teaching and using these evaluations to make adjustments to their practice. 6. Phonics after school K-2 New York Edge; Homework help 3. Math teachers conduct inter-class and inter-school visits to observe best practices in math. 4. Based on the results of ELA and Math baseline assessments, teachers in grades 3-8 use Lexile scores to purposefully match text to readers when planning lessons. As a result, students will be actively engaged in the close reading of rigorous texts that are within their zone of proximal development. Students will also be matched to their level in mathematics. Flexible Fridays will be used for remediation and enrichment using the venue of station rotation teaching. 7. K-8 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Begin the school year with support on developing standards based learning targets. Address and unpack standards from previous year. planning standards based lessons incorporating rigor 1. 9/2018- 6/2019 2. 9/2018- ongoing 3. 9/2018-ongoing 4. 11/2018-6/2019 5. 1/2019-5/2019 1. Implementation and Oversight: Assistant Principal - Teacher Leaders Principal 2. Implementation: 3-8 teachers. Oversight: Assistant Principal-Teacher Leaders - Principal Math Coach 3. Implementation: 3-8 teachers. Oversight: Assistant Principal Lead Teachers 4. . Implementation: Inquiry team Oversight: Principal 5. Implementation: 3-8 teachers. Oversight: Principal 6. Implementation Teachers Oversight: Assistant Principal Principal Teacher leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  5. The Core leadership Team /School Inquiry/Data Team will use school wide data to effectively organize Academic Intervention Service groups based on students’ needs. (AIS Pull Out) Teacher Teams meet to customize assignments using the instructional shifts in Math Focus, Rigor, Coherence and in ELA - Complexity, Building background knowledge and Evidence. 6. After School and Saturday School Academies supporting the needs of at-risk students in ELA and Math by utilizing technological programs such as Math XL, MyOn, IReady and Mathletics. Grades K-8 7. Mathletics and Math XL can be used as a technological tool to foster skill practice by supporting deficient areas in math. Grades K-8 8. Illustrative mathematics can be used as a tool to show videos on how to solve math problems. 9. In Collaboration with New York Edge, Community Based Organization to provide one hour of intervention using MyOn and mathematics for ELA and Math practice as an extension to the regular day. Teachers will intensify the data drawn from the use of these programs and track progress. 10. In addition, MyOn Web based interest tool measures the number of books read and the number of hours read - students can take notes and annotate the text while reading. Lexile levels can be determined and tracked for growth. 11. (CRT) Using resources which depict the population served will add to student interest and engagement in all subject matters. 6. 9/2018-6/2019 7. 10/2018-6/2019 Principal, Lead Teacher Principal/AP Coordinator Data Specialist Teacher leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19 CBO - After school providers Teachers, ENL Teacher Leader, Coaches Assistant Principal, Principal Teacher Center Staff Developer Classroom teachers, ENL teacher Partnership with children- CBO, Parent Empowerment Team Principal Parent Coordinator Graphic organizers will be used for all students who are struggling in Math and ELA. Students will be engrossed in speaking, listening and writing school wide. The ENL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teacher and support the unit topics with push in and pull out services. Tier 2 interventions will be used for SWD's using SDI - specialized Designed instruction Lowest third, ELL, students with disabilities October 2018- June 2019 SWD January 2019-June 2019 Strategies to increase parent involvement Parent Orientation - August, 2018 New Student Orientation was held to meet new parents and new students to PS 308. A book of the month will be instituted to engage the entire school community. Parents of students K-8 July 2018-June 2019 We will offer monthly parent workshops specifically in literacy and math during the Parent Engagement Tuesdays but also provide wrap around services for parents in health, parenting and mindfulness. Increase opportunities to visit school plays, activities, academic and social events. Quarterly Principal's breakfast beginning October 19, 2018. The school calendar is a look into school events which will attract parents to become involved in multiple events as the year progresses have been distributed to all families. Award ceremonies, honor breakfast will be held after each report card distribution. PTA sub-group parents meet bi-weekly with parent coordinators at 308 generate ideas to engage parents in community events. parents will engage in: Art Gala, School wide Oratory Contest, Family Fashion Show, Bus Trip to Washington D.C., Holiday Bus Ride for parents and teachers. August 2018 - A Middle School Orientation, 9/13/2018 Curriculum Night. Family night is scheduled for October 16 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  coordinated by the PTA to occur after each monthly PTA meeting, Parent Academy Activities to increase trust 9/19/2018 We begin to celebrate Daddy Donut Day where fathers have breakfast with their children to develop a positive partnership with our parents. We will celebrate success as well as support the belief that we are all in the learning process together. As we move towards excellence in creating relationships, we encourage to strengthen communication and transparency. The PS/IS 308 Parent Suite is opened for parents of the school community. Utilizing resources such as computers, library and informational services, resource connections for translation services, fax and copying. It is here teachers can also engage in dialogue with their parents to discuss any academic or behavioral concerns for their children. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Fathers and male figures in all of our students' lives September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018 under the direction of the principal, each teacher create an introductory letter and course syllabus of all of the units of study their child will be exposed to for the entire year. This affords parents the opportunity to check homework and other assignments against the syllabus as a way of keeping informed of academic standards and expectations; Weekly homework sheets are distributed so that parents can again align activities to the syllabus. Administrators receive copies of the homework sheet to ensure homework is appropriate for each grade. October 2018 periodic progress reports will be mailed to parents updating them on how their child is progressing mailed out prior to report cards. We will offer monthly parent workshops specifically in literacy and math during the Parent Involvement Tuesdays. Three times during the school year beginning in November 2018 we will initiate a parent engagement activity involving student and parents together looking at student work while the teacher is explaining each piece of work and the expectation. Parents can hear and learn academic vocabulary being used, standards and become familiar with strategies and tips to support their child at home. All goals and data will be shared at the monthly SLT meetings, parents will hen share the information to other parents in the community or at the monthly PTA meetings, Members of the SLT will be allowed to conduct walk - through of classrooms as a 'show and tell" of standards based classrooms and curriculum. Quarterly Principal's breakfast's will update parents of the state of the school including data trends and programming. . The school calendar is a look into school events which will attract parents to become involved as the year progresses. Award ceremonies, honor breakfast will be held after each report card distribution celebrating students who are achieving and most improved . PTA sub-group will meet bi-weekly with parent coordinator at 308 generate ideas as part of the events team committee to engage parents in community events such as Art Gala, School wide Oratory Contest, Respect For ALL essay contest, Holiday Bus Ride for parents and teachers, graduation, student government elections, Tigers on Fire celebrating students who are on a continual quest of academic achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher Leaders 2. Teacher- Regular school day ( Academic Intervention Service Tier 1 - (pushables and slippables) 3. Saturday School teachers 6 teachers x 2 hours/session (Rally Rehearsal) 4. Common planning/ Inquiry Team- 8 teachers x 30 sessions x 2 hours/ session x teacher per session rate (Rally Rehearsal Materials) 5. After School Success Teachers- 6 teachers x 18 weeks x 6 hours per week (Rally! Rehearsal Materials) 6 6 teachers x 10 weeks x 6 hours per week (Rally! Rehearsal Materials) 7. Supervisor x 18 weeks x 6 hours hours per week 8. Teacher-regular school day (Supplies: student writing journals, ink, Common Core aligned Math and ELA books) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The cycle begins in September 2018 with a diagnostic (Baseline), then by January 2019, we administer an interim or midterm benchmark assessment, the final assessment administered in May 2019 will assess growth. By February 2019 we expect to increase the performance index of scholars by 3%. Progress will be monitored in the following ways :  Distribute daily end of lesson exit tickets  Maintain conference notes  Use aggressive progress monitoring tools during the lesson  Assign/analyze unit pre and post test scores to show growth patterns  Quizzes  Mini-think ( Critical thinking question as an assessment)  Once teachers assess, they re-teach and adjust the unit plan  Through common planning and inquiry teams  Weekly data meetings with the principal  Observations with regular timely feedback Teachers will align instruction with Danielson Domain 1 and Domain 3 discussion protocols and assessment practices to assess student learning. The five core propositions from the National Boards standards will help in planning for the student populations. All teachers are focusing on Danielson 1a - planning and preparation with quality mini-lessons 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22 modeling expectation with exemplars. Administrators will monitor progress by conducting observation cycles and providing on going feedback using the Danielson rubric. Data conversations will take place to assess progress of teachers and students' growth. February 2019; data from Schoonet shows an improvement in focus standards for all grades as compared to the September data- our 6th graders has shown the most gains from September 2018. By February 2019 all teachers will have engaged in cycles of professional learning ( Algebra For ALL sessions and coaching) to develop an awareness of conceptual learning in mathematics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Weekly data conversations using evidence from standards based lesson plans, exit tickets, analysis of learning targets. Student work should measure progress toward the standards. Informed decisions on next steps are influenced by the results. Progress monitoring forms are essential to measure progress. 9/2018 BOY - January 2019 MOY data comparison. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Strengths: We have several partnership programs that address students’ social and emotional needs such as Partnership with Children and it's myriad of mindfulness programs. PWC support attendance at PS 308 with a school store and a point system - Points are redeemed for prizes at the store. PWC also has a director of social work, social worker and an intern to help with group and or individualize counseling. During the, 2017-2018 we celebrated 90% attendance near our goal. New York Edge's after school program serves k-5 and 6-8 an educational liaison helps to streamline the day school with after school goals ,65% of students reported that they agree or strongly agree that PS 308 offers a wide enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school, and 90% of parents reported the same (2018 School Survey Report). Our SSP- School Support Personnel is an integral part of our social emotional support to students and our supportive school culture. This SSP -School Support Personnel has the expertise to help students to understand, manage, and express their feelings regarding social and emotional issues. This enables the successful management of student achievement such as learning, forming relationships, solving everyday problems, and adapting to the complex demands of growth and development. This includes self-awareness, control of impulsively, working cooperatively, and caring about oneself and others. The principal adopted the 3 R system of transforming the school culture and climate into a calm civil environment. Respect, Responsibility and resilience along with our Scholar Pledge has helped to create a picture of what a successful school looks like and feels like. Students receive merits for their positive behavior and become known as a Tiger On Fire with their name in lights. Students receive Section sheets are used to monitor upper grade behavior each class period. student government elections will 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  strengthened student voice school wide. Restorative justice practices in classes during advisory support positive student interaction. A group of students who are scholar ambassadors represent our school at the district level, this increases students self- esteem and increase involvement in school extra curricular activities. 1a. As of August 2018 PS 308 has been removed from NY States' Potentially Persistently Dangerous List. Priority Needs: Currently funding has impeded additional programming for students. In addition to Music and Gym during the 2017-2018 school year, a part time art teacher serviced our students three days a week. Due to limited funding we were unable to hire a full-time art and guidance counselor. Previously an F status guidance counselor worked primarily with elementary male students in the formation of a little league basketball team, while an ATR Guidance Counselor serviced the middle school. This school year we have only one guidance counselor to provide mandated counseling for 39 students. We have had to engage the school social worker, (who reports three days a week to 308 ) in providing mandated counseling for students. September 2018 we had to search outside for programs that would subsidize art for our students. We were only able to get a consultant for one day a week. According to our students 2017-2018 NYC Survey results, they disagree that our school offers a wide enough variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep them interested in school. We are working to increase the amount of programs and activities to keep students interested beyond academics. Most of our male students would like more time in gym. Partnering with New York Edge has strongly filled a void of having the need for more physical activity for the middle scholars. Many young men are in need of manhood training therefore we are gearing up to begin a Young Men’s Initiative to focus on team building male empowerment. We are building our technology based programs to include coding and animation as well as support differentiation in math and literacy for our scholars.. Our girls are interested in cheer leading, fashion design and a Girls Empowerment Program. Based on a student survey early morning Intramural would draw students to school early, they are interested in experimenting with non-traditional sports such as Lacrosse not excluding basketball. This would partially combat the attendance issues we face on a daily basis (Lateness) 2017-2018 state test data reveals: In Math out of 180 scholars tested 116 scored level 1, 49 scores level 2, 12 scored level 3 and 3 scored level 4. In ELA out of 178 scholars tested 91 scored level 1, 52 scored level 2, 26 scored level 3 and 9 scored level 4 It is clear students need practice in both subject areas with a clear priority being math. SWD's are a priority as we moved students to LRE for the purpose of interacting with the general population in collaborative group studies and SDI. February 2019: Girls Art Therapy Group - Development of socio- emotional state February 2019 GENTS (Male Group) - Development of socio-emotional state February - Tier 3 intervention: Core Leadership Tutors provided for Lowest third. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  By June 2019, there will be a 5% decrease in the number of incidents as compared to June 2018 OORS data. February 2019 - decrease in incidents as compared to February 2018 OORS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. -New York Edge after school basketball program for middle school students keep students actively engaged in physical activity after school. 1. Grades 6-8 1. January- June 2019 2. Grades k-k-5 3. CHAMPS basketball program gives students an incentive to come to school early and stay late, as well as to do well in classes. 3. Grades 6-8 2. December 2018 March 2019 4. Themed school wide evening events give students opportunities to perform on stage in theater and dance, as well as to play musical instruments. A grant from Vans landed $10,000 in instruments to start a student rock band 4. Grades pK-8 3. October- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1. Implementation: New York Edge director and Staff Oversight: Assistant Principal: Teacher Leader 2. Implementation: teachers grades K-2; Oversight: Ms. Bl;ake, Parent Coordinator Gym teacher - Ms. O. Music teache- Mr. E. 5. Special mentorship program for at risk middle school students (including once per week group share, special writing and reading discussions, trips, and additionally counseling services as necessary provided by PWC). 5. Middle school students 4. November- June 2019 3. 6. Students grades 5-8 5. Sept.2018- June 2019 Implementation: PE teachers; Oversight: Principal 6. Partnership with the New York Edge Foundation 7. School Support Personnel: focuses on developing self respect, mentorships, youth development, emotion management skills, and impulsively control in at-risk students, coordinate Jr. Dean Leadership program, Dean's exclusive 6. 7. At risk students grades 5-8 4. Implementation: pK-8 staff; Oversight: Principal Sept. 2018- June 2019 5. Implementation: volunteer staff 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  8. Face - Families STEAM Collaboration 9. Tigers On Fire - celebration board for students who follow the 3R matrix 10. Animation Club; Art therapy with students who meet with mentors to create digital stories which deal with conflict resolution. 11. Student council - government to speak with principal during breakfast with principal quarterly to discuss the state of the school and add student voice 12. BRIC - Socio- Emotional support 13. CAT - Creative Arts Team 7. Sept 2018- June 2019 grades 7-8. Oversight: Principal 6. Implementation: staff, selected teachers grades 5-8. Oversight: Principal Guidance Social Worker 7. Implementation: , Dean Oversight: Principal Strategies to address the needs of sub groups: Identified emotionally at risk students November 2018- June 2019 Implementation: volunteer staff grades 7-8. Oversight: We are targeting a specific sub group of emotionally at risk students to participate in a specialized counseling and mentoring program, as well as to get students involved in one non academic activity they are interested in, in order to build self esteem and attendance at school. Strategies to increase parent involvement: We invite parents to attend concerts and to volunteer during the day. Parents are asked to commit 10 hours of volunteer work at PS 308. We also invite parents to catered events throughout the year, including, Mardi Gras Ball, Multi-cultural celebrations, Career Day, College Tours, Black History Month, Honoring Dr. martin Luther King, and Juneteenth celebrations. We invite parents to attend monthly attendance meetings. Electronic messages and other social media outlets are used to are send regular alerting messages to parents of school events. This ensures that parents are deeply connected to the academic and extra curricular activities as PS 308, and that they support their children in non academic endeavours. September 2018- June 2019 All parents, particularly parents of students who are chronically late or absent. SIT team PPT Team Implementation: Attendance coordinator, teachers pk-8; Oversight: Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal, Principal PWC Attendance teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Activities that increase Trust: A new school website, facebook account and twitter will connect more parents to events at PS 308. We work to build transparency with our families. Pk-8 students September 2018-June 2019 Implementation: pK-8 staff; Oversight: Assistant Principal Teachers with special talent or interest in extra curricular activities beneficial to students are recruited to lead and support students in those specific activities (i.e. basketball, band and dance) . This helps ensure that students receive quality instruction in high-interest activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Parent Coordinator Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We invite parents to attend school events and to volunteer by regularly sending newsletters and electronic messages home. The parent coordinator along with the PTA executive board work together to create a calendar of events that invite parents into the building. There are two events for September 2018 beginning with the Boo Hoo party for parents of Pre k students followed by Dads and Donuts bringing male figures into the school. We also invite parents to join our parent academy where they volunteer to tutor or work on our beautification committee. Late October parents will be invited to the Mardi Gras Ball, In November there will be a multi-cultural celebration, celebrating our diverse cultures and a Holiday show is planned for December to bring families together in celebrabration of holidays around the world. January brings the "I have a Dream Contest" while February brings a Black History celebration and Spring College Tours, Math and ELA pep rally and ending with the Juneteenth celebration and annual parent forum. We invite parents to attend monthly attendance meetings, PTA and SLT meetings. Our parent academy has afforded parents to come in and work on beautification of our school to depict various cultures and topics. The SLT is the main link to the parent body. PTA, Admin, Teachers, CBO's and parent coordinator collectively and collaboratively plan parent engagement activities. Cultural Relevant practices will impact the number of parents who will engage in the school community. Family involvement is beneficial to children's development and learning. an inclusive environment will be fostered through this approach and therefore enhance a strong partnership with families. Hosting a parent academy will keep parents engaged and 'in the know' regarding school events and how to better support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. SASF after school Title 1 2. Consultants- $10,000 PF Set aside (Tru Skool program) 3. PTA/SLT 4. 6 teachers x per session rate x 10 weeks x 2 hours/week 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  5-11. 2 teachers x per session rate x 10 weeks x 4 hours/week 6. Student Government ( Coordinators) 7. Guidance/SSP _ School Support Personnel 8. Parent Coordinators 9. Assembly schedule 10. Professional Videos on select topics 11. NGSST - Art Consultant $2, 600.00 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will have met our target of having 80% of our students involved in extra- curricular activities - The after school New York Edge program encompasses elementary students, the New York Edge for middle school students meet after school with involvement in trips and excursions across New York City and the bed Sty Community. * We will keep abreast by monitoring weekly attendance *Closely monitoring after school participation and number of participants actively engaged in competitive sports events off campus on the weekend and after school. February 2019 principal will meet with parents to share year to date information and celebrate their progress and participation thus far in supporting school events and the working the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Signature pages, student survey, student enrollment forms and student completed after-school applications. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Teachers use data to create SMART groups based on their instructional needs and then develop a plan across grades to determine the best instructional practices to meet the needs of particular groups. Also, the school aligns curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards to cognitively engage all students in learning higher-order skills. Unit plans are created including targets, activities, assessment and standards. Teachers work collaboratively during common planning to create unit plans and research strategies that aid in student improvement. there are an additional four teacher leaders that sit on the core leadership team which are involved in peer to peer coaching. An individual from all disciplines school wide are on the team. ELA, Special educators, ESL, Middle school, Elementary, AP, principal meet to plan role of instructional initiatives Priority Needs: data from Central Led review, 2015-2016, 2016-2017, 2017- 2018 consistently show the instructional core need strengthening. Planning and preparation is a key focus for improved pedagogy in the instructional core. We need to deepen the work in planning and preparation for diverse learning groups of teachers and students. Deeper questioning and discussion techniques. are needed, modeling using exemplars in explicit instruction to ensure students are aware of expectations, aggressive monitoring is needed to adjust and re.adjust instruction when analyzing data. September 2018 protocols are adopted to focus planning on unpacking standards and unpacking of and a close reading of the curriculum to extract big ideas. Teacher teams need guidance in lesson planning. Continual guidance and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  observation and feedback is need in keeping teachers on the track to effective planning. Plans must incorporate engagement and complexity with integration of the instructional shifts to elevate the thinking of all students. Teacher directed lessons is a concern. Teachers need to strengthen pedagogical skills in order to allow students to experience productive struggle causing them to make discoveries and work cooperatively with their peers. Monitor progress and make refinements. 2017-2018 data reveals In ELA 51% of our scholars are performing at level 1, 29% are level 2, 15% level 3 and 5% level 4 In Math 64% of our scholars are performing at level 1, 27% are at level 2, 7% are at level 3 and 2% are at level 4 2.2% of our students with disabilities are functioning at level 3 and 4. 98% are performing below grade level. February 2019 Advance data reveals teachers are planning and preparing more rigorous lessons as they meet weekly to review the curriculum and student work. Every room has charts and graphs used as reference for students to use in completing assignments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will engage in collaborative team planning using explicit teaching that models expectations for students as measured by observational feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Extend the Danielson Framework to include Domain 1a planning and preparation and Domain 3 Instruction. Professional learning to include all teachers at PS 308 ( teacher led workshops on questioning, engagement, differentiation, aggressive monitoring, common core aligned tasks) Planning to include using data accurately pinpointing trends and patterns January-June 2019 pK-8 teachers · Math/ELA teachers · Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Implementation: Labsite teachers; Oversight: Assistant Principal · Implementation: CCS consultants; Oversight: Assistant Principal · Implementation: Labsite teachers; Oversight: Assistant Principal Principal Teacher Leaders- Principal · January –June 2019 · November 2018- February 2019 November 2018-June 2019 November 2018-June 2019 2. PD Teacher Leader –(Go Math)) Attend Literacy design Collaborative workshop - writing quality performance tasks " Understanding the Shifts" pK-8 teachers K-8 New NGSS Standard workshop Peer Coaching by Core Leadership Team and Algebra For ALL Coach Accessing Tools and Resources to help address shifts 3. Grade Level team leaders/ weekly team meetings: Workshop Model, Curriculum Mapping, Planning, Data Analysis 4. Professional Readings – Using Data To Focus Instructional Improvement, Leverage Leadership by: Bambrick and Santoya Coherence by : Michael Fullan, Instructional rounds, Getting better faster - Uncommon Schools K-8 The Power of Smart Goals: By Jan O'Neil and Anne Conzemius 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Teach Like Your Hair is On Fire By: Rafe Esquith The Mindset By: Carol Dwerk 5. Explore the use of Kagen Cooperative Learning Strategies Strategies to address the needs of sub groups We will implement several specific questioning and discussion protocols school wide to ensure each student has multiple opportunities to ask/answer questions and discuss text before responding in writing or performing an assessment. Graphic organizers will help students organize their thinking and close reading strategies will help navigate through complex text when reading. Guided guided group sessions support student SWD. Station rotation and flexible grouping will support remediation and enrichment Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement We will invite parents to come observe whole class conversations and other discussion protocols. We will also develop workshops for parents on asking quality questions. Workshops on how to engage their child in reading using strategies such as underlining, circling and defining vocabulary, identifying specific context clues as close reading strategies. Useful tools that build cognitive skills of students are taught to parents so they can reinforce those tools at home. We will also unpacking the standards with parents and share academic vocabulary and what their children are suppose to be able to do to meet the the rigor of the standards at each level. Activities that address the element of Trust We will conduct inter-classroom visitations to observe protocols as we are learning as a school community how to implement them effectively. As a collective group teachers, admin and parents attend workshops together as a learning community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement SWD, ELLs, lowest third November 2018-June 2019 Implementation: Labsite teachers; Oversight: Assistant Principal IEP Teacher Special Needs Teachers SBST All parents and guardians November 2018-June 2019 Implementation: Labsite teachers; Oversight: Assistant Principal PK-8 teachers November 2018-June 2019 Implementation: Labsite teachers; Oversight: Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  We will invite parents to come observe whole class conversations and other discussion protocols. We will also develop workshops for parents on asking quality questions. Workshops on how to engage their child in reading using strategies such as annotations (underlining and circling words and phrases) defining academic vocabulary, identifying specific context clues as close reading strategies. Useful tools that build cognitive skills of students are taught to parents so they can reinforce those tools at home. We also unpacking the standards with parents and share what their children are suppose to be able to do to meet the the rigor of the standards at each level. Math workshops will be offered to build math fluency at home by translators in various languages. An ENL institute will be instituted in January for our students who would like to learning basic English provided by our ENL teacher. Instituting an adult class that focuses on the diverse cultures represented in our school focusing on cultural awareness will motivate parents to partner with the school which will positively impact student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Schedule adjustments: During common planning time, admin periods and on Monday PD. Teachers will be involved in training in supporting students in productive struggle when engaged in rigorous tasks and customize learning. Parent engagement Tuesdays will be used as professional learning time with parents to become familiar with strategies that can be used and reinforced at home. 2. PF set aside Consultants: 3. Monday PD professional discourse groups (weekly) 4. Break out groups Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, data will show a decrease in the amount of students performing at level 1 in math by 4% school wide and an increase in the amount of students performing at levels 3 and 4 as evidenced by formative assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Weekly data conversations using evidence from standards based lesson plans, exit tickets, analysis of learning targets and student work should measure the progress of students toward the standards. Informed decisions on next steps are influenced by the results. . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x xx SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: School leader carefully monitor data and when problems become evident, create teams to address issues. School leaders use the Danielson framework to collect low inference data and confer with teachers to improve their practice. The principal makes effective organizational decisions and uses resources in support of school-wide goals to improve student outcomes. (1.3) The principal has funded academic intervention services for all learners. Saturday school and after school programs are held for students in grades 3-8. The lower grades will also participate in an after-school program four days a week in partnership with our CBO, New York Edge. Multiple systems and structures are in place to support teaching and learning. Established practice labs to support teacher pedagogy - Empower core leadership team to work as peer coaches in support of the vision and mission of the school while coaching teachers in the improvement in their practice. Priority Needs: 2.4: Leaders need to continue to monitor and support pedagogy through on-going observation cycles and actionable feedback to teachers based on observation data and promote self-reflection as a means to set the stage for teachers to self-determine their next level of support according to their needs . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Priority needs: Strengthen the established tracking of school-wide goals, teacher goals, student goals and planning documents to drive school improvement efforts that will result in clear expectations for student achievement and student learning outcomes. (3.1) Goals must be more consistently reviewed, monitored, and revised. *Student learning will be impacted within an evidenced based system structured to prioritize and check for understanding on an going bases. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least75% of ELA and Math teachers will receive targeted one to one coaching and improve pedagogical practices as evidenced by receiving an effective rating in the areas of Domain, 1 planning and preparation and Domain 3 of .the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly PD with co- hort of principals Administration 11/18-6/19 MPPR Coaching PK-8 teachers 9/18-6/19 PK-8 teachers 1/18-6/19 Advance Trainng by TDEC or administrators with NYCDOE instructional coach PD on Advance system (for teachers) planning and preparation; effective use of models and exemplar during weekly practice labs PD on CCSS with BFS Examination of needs and progress of students in subgroups is targeted part of the post observation feedback discussion Pk-8 teachers 9/18-6/19 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Implementation/Oversight: Administration Implementation/Oversight: Administration Implementation/Oversight: Administration Implementation/Oversight: Administration Implementation/Oversight: Administration Professional Learning workshops with teachers and parents on Danielson Framework will develop a common language and set of expectations with all stakeholders in the school community. Providing thorough PD and materials for teachers balances expectations with support. We work together to identify target areas for additional PD through inter-class visitations and professional discourse. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement parents of Pk-8 students 1/18-6/19 PK-8 teachers 9/18-6/19 Implementation/Oversight: Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  We will invite parents to come observe whole class systems, structures and reference charts as evidence of teacher modeling. We will also develop workshops for parents on explicit teaching, cultural responsive teaching and aggressive monitoring. August 2018 Principal Open house Principal's book of the month speaks to culture and climate of the school and the 3R's September, December, March, May Breakfast with principal Monthly SLT Meeting with principals sharing data school news Quarterly PTA meeting - state of the school address Monthly school newsletters celebrating students and families from diverse backgrounds Electronic messages from the principal Inviting parents to come in and share information about their culture and background - lead a workshop in creating something from their culture Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our goal is to maximize the instructional program by strategically aligning fundsfor the purpose if addressing the unique needs of our school population are met. We coordinate our fiscal and human resources beginning with a full overview of allocated funds in collaboration with our borough budget specialist. Next we will allocate funds needed to cover classroom instruction and coaching and administrative staff based on programming needs using Tax Levy and Title 1 funds. Once all pedagogical staff is assigned, we will manage funds to cover rewards for improved behavior and funds to cover OTPS including: Teacher, Paraprofessional to support instruction and extra-curricular activities. [External consultants facilitating PD; Internal staff facilitating; PD Teacher per session, supplies/ materials to support weekly team collaboration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will decrease the number of students scoring level 1 in Math and ELA by 3% and increase the number of students performing level 3 and 4 in ELA and Math by 3%. SWD's will increase level by 2% overall level 3 and 4. This goal will be met by aggressive monitoring, planning effective lessons with differentiated targeted learning activities and on going assessment practices.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019 a data tracking system will show an increase in student achievement as measured by formative assessments and recorded in our easily accessible GoogleDocs. daily exit tickets being used by teachers at the close of each lesson to assess immediate knowledge of students. Unit pre and post test. External assessment practices will be used to include review of data at inquiry teams to look for patterns and trends. Self and peer assessments using a rubric will allow students to monitor their own learning. Student portfolios will be monitored monthly to assess student learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to 2017-2018 parents agreed that PS/IS 308. Staff work to keep them informed about what their child is learning. Parents agreed that PS 308 keeps them informed about services for them or their child, such as tutoring, health fairs, after-school programs, or workshops at school and makes them feel welcome. Parents agreed that PS 308’s new principal has a genuine concern about improving student achievement and parent involvement and will work with her to lead change. School is very open to partnering with outside agencies. 2018 NYC survey parents indicate they are pleased with the direction the school is moving. Priority Needs: We need to expand the partnerships with community-based organizations to increase the supports provided to students academically, socially, and emotionally. During the 2017-2018 school year parents received a yearly calendar of events and dates as well as a parent newsletter monthly to keep them informed of school events. 2018 - parent forum survey showed more parent involvement activities are needed around academic understanding and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  giving parents voice to share interesting facts about their children instead of being talked "at' during workshops. Parents prefer to engage in activities that promote thought. More preparatory classes for parents are needed to help with writing and basic math knowledge. Resume writing and job placement assistance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will a 5% increase in parents who participate in monthly activities. as measured by the school learning survey, attendance sheets and logs. There will be an increase in teachers participating in PTA activities. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  We offer a variety of workshops during parent empowerment Tuesdays, including homework routines, incentive systems, healthy parents/healthy children, the Danielson Framework/what good instruction should look like, and preparing for the ELA assessment. Workshops take place twice per month.  We use an automated telephone system to All parents 9/18-6/19 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration All parents 9/18-6/19 Parent Coordinator, Administration efficiently notify parents of activities, meetings, or changes in the school day. All parents 9/18-6/19  We celebrate the innovation and success of parents in the community by featuring a parent of the month.  Our parent coordinators arrange specialized trips and celebrations for students and families with excellence in attendance.  The PTA is working to implement GED/ESL/ resume Writing/ Interview Skills and computer training courses for families in our community.  Classroom mothers volunteer to work with teachers and students to host special celebrations. Families of students with excellence in attendance All families and community volunteers All parents/Guardians All Parents/Guardians * Parent Coordinator, PTA, Administration Parent Coordinator, PTA, Administration * Parent Coordinator, PTA,Administration 9/18-6/19 Parent Coordinator, PTA,Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44   Our SIT team works with teachers and families of high-risk students to develop specialized behavior and academic plans tailored to meet students’ socio and emotional needs. Families of students with special needs 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 SIT team, Parents, Administration Teachers will receive Universal Design Learning and SDI _ PD to ensure they are meeting the needs of all students in differentiated ways. Interest surveys and learning style surveys will be distributed to students. ICT teacher(s) will use Marilyn Friend’s video “The Power of Two” in order to settle on a teaching model that supports all learners in the ICT setting. We invite parents to evening events and activities including holiday and cultural celebrations. Events include dinner and student musical and dance performances. Parents and teachers have the opportunity to celebrate students in a non-threatening environment, which builds trust and strengthens relationships. All Teachers/Paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 Teachers, Administration All parents 9/18-6/19 Teachers, Parents Administration, School Staff - - - - 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Consultant; No Gun Smoke School Tour - Art Education. Partnership With Children New York Edge Vans - Music Grant Kinetics Arts Fan4 Kids Providing students with activities which speak to nutrition and wellness through partnerships foster an awareness of better eating habits and the need for physical conditioning. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will effectively use our Parent Coordinator, PTA and Community School Director to reach out to parents inviting them to parent workshops and school events. We wil continue to partner with the Lion’s Club, the Brownstoners, Rise Youth Athletics and other CBO’s to better serve our school community. We will continue to use members of our Inquiry Team and PCs to focus on collecting data from parent surveys which indicate how to best encourage parent and community involvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will conduct a parent satisfaction survey similar to the School Survey to determine how satisfied parents are with the school’s parent engagement and instruction. Our goal is to have 25% of parents report that they have been invited to events at the school more than 5 times so far this year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Signature forms, agendas, survey forms, parent feedback forms and data from the school messenger. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 2018ELA Exam, Item Skills Analysis, baseline and benchmark data, Quizlet 2018Math Exam, Item Skills Analysis, baseline and benchmark data, iReady, Mathletics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Intensive Skills based Reading and Writing Small group - guided instruction- flexible grouping flexible stations When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 2 days/ week after school (5 hours total), Saturdays 2 hours use of scaffolds and exemplars 45 min pull out Intensive skills based remediation flexible grouping Small group guided instruction flexible stations 2days/ week after school (6 hours total), Saturdays 2 hours 45 min pull out use of manipulatives,scaffolds, exemplars Formative and Summative Assessments (Level 1-2), Smart Science Intensive skills based remediation flexible grouping Small group hands-on learning- 3 days/ week after school (6 hours total), Saturdays 2 hours technology labs weekly Formative and Summative Assessments (Level 1-2), Intensive skills based remediation flexiblegrouping SIT team, PPT team recommendation Counseling CBO trip to learning gardens Small group- guided instruction - analysis of primaryand secondary sources connected to historical events Small group or one on one counseling provided daily and weekly for students 3 days/ week after school (6 hours total), Saturdays 2 hours During the school day- AISsmall group pull out. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  who are mandated and at risk 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 out of the school’s population of 267 students are housed in New York City temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funds will be used to purchase school uniform and school supplies for students in temporary housing. Students will be allowed involvement in all school activities at the expense of the school. Counseling services, food bank and assistance with social services will be provided by the school and the community based organization for these families. Meeting the educational needs of STH children through distributing targeting resources sufficiently to improve Sate assessment scores. Providing children with an enriched and accelerated educational program, including the use of school-wide programs and additional services. Providing parent workshops to allow parents the substantial and meaningful opportunities to participate in the education of their children. Access to the school pantry weekly to assist low economic children. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). PS/IS 308 has 30 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49 The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor’s Regulation A-780 ensure that students residing in temporary living situations have access to the same public education and services that are available to permanently housed students. To ensure that all of our Students in Temporary Housing receive all proper and needed resources in addition to the regular academic program we have the following services in place: -dedicated guidance counselor(s) who are aware of students’ status and follow their academic and social-emotional progress/interact with families/regular check-ins on students -attendance incentives and celebrations -academic honor celebrations with families -full access to the after-school program and computers beyond the regular school program -we monitor their resources and provide needed supplies such as back-packs -we work with the NYC DOE STH unit to identify best practices, health contacts, counseling services and professional services that our STH families may need as support 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Visit all hiring institutions to find suitable candidates. 2. Partner with Colleges to host student teachers in our school and then retain them 3. Partner with Colleges to host student observers in our school 4. Allow team of teachers to interview candidates to ensure a positive cultural fit. · Once we hire teachers they are allotted 90 minutes weekly to plan in content areas with their colleagues. During these sessions, teachers create unit plans, plan cohesive lessons, share best teaching practices, research and share resources, analyze data, create short term goals using current data, discuss student progress and receive professional development. · Teachers meet weekly to discuss grade wide concerns, including academic, attendance, and behavioral concerns. Teachers create action plans to solve problems on a grade wide, as well as individual student basis. · Teachers are provided with immediate, constructive feedback using the Danielson framework, after both formal and informal observations, with the intention to build upon areas of strength and improve areas of weakness. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). · Teachers are given multiple professional learning opportunities through both private consultants visiting the school, and programs outside of the building. Teachers are also given access to attend high quality Common Core professional development in house and provided by the BFSC. Inter-visitations to other schools are common practice. · Additionally, PS/IS 308 is building capacity by having grade leaders to lead grade bands. Teams of teachers collaborate around a common pedagogical strength or research tools, attend outside workshops and then turnkey information to the staff. These teacher team members act as resources for the entire staff and participate in instructional walks. Maintain, differentiated Professional Learning Plan based on needs from cycles of observations and feedback Principal is a member of the Superintendent's focus group as critical friends and the CSA supervisory support program. Principal is a National Board candidate whose thinking is aligned to the five core propositions of accomplished teaching. Therefore candidates must agree to become a member of that cohort for when hired.. Attend hiring halls throughout New York City Work with closely with universities to form partnerships with student teachers and clinicians to get the best and the brightest upon graduation ( York College- Brooklyn College) Interview candidates looking for similar interest and values regarding education Ensure that candidates have been trained in the common core standards and understand the research behind how children learn best. Interview candidates who entrench their work in research Search for candidates who understand the implications of the standards on their teaching Paraprofessionals are included in the professional learning sessions so that they can support the teacher and students by extending learning one to one or in small group guided learning The Assistant Principal attend workshops and meet with the principal daily to share ideas. and concerns. ·Once staff has been selected they are allotted 90 minutes weekly to plan in content areas. They buddy up with a teacher leader. They are assigned a mentor through the NYC mentoring program. During 90 minute sessions, teachers create unit plans, plan cohesive lessons, share best teaching practices, research and share resources, analyze data, create short term goals using current data, discuss student progress and receive professional development. Teachers work collaboratively in reading and discussing professional articles on best practices Teachers meet weekly to discuss grade wide concerns, including academic, attendance, and behavioral concerns. Teachers create action plans to solve problems on a grade wide, as well as individual student basis. · 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. - 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). - Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). The pre-K teachers work closely with the kindergarten teachers to align curriculum to create a smooth transition into elementary school for children. Pre-Kindergarten teachers have skill and experience teaching grades K-1, which contributes to overarching connectivity across PK-1 grade bands. Pre-K, kindergarten, and Grade 1 students participate in field trips together, students and parents have an opportunity to build relationships with current and future teachers during parent meetings. Teachers meet in grade bands in order to maintain dialogue on the specific needs of each grade with this information it makes it easier to inform instruction for those students who are working below grade level and those who are performing above the grade. Beginning in the month of October there is a meet and greet and parents have the opportunity to sign up as a class parent. A meet and greet is held so that all parents can meet and build community, Students work in classrooms stations based on their developmental levels. There is guided and independent practice in critical thinking and questioning. Classroom trips and excursions are planned around the curriculum. During the spring, Pre-K students and parents visit Kindergarten classrooms to meet new teachers and get exposed to the expectations of Elementary school. Smarty Ants is a web based common core aligned tool used by k-2 students to improve their phonemic awareness. it helps build early literacy skills as students move into kindergarten first and second grade. Once skills are strong, students use another reading web based tool MyOn. Lexile levels are then determined and tracked. Read Aloud and Think Aloudsmimic the balanced literacy program followed in kindergarten. Students follow a reading theme in the beginning the year “All About Me’ which has a narrative focus led by all grades school wide from pre k - 8. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Teachers work in teams to create performance tasks as well as common formative assessments across a grade that come in many forms Teachers use the beginning of year ELA and Math assessment as a baseline and use it again as an interim assessment. Training in the use of data from units of study pre and post will take place showing teachers how to track gains, see trends and patterns, Prior to each unit of study teachers use unit pre-test and a unit post test to assess growth in that unit. Common Core annotated sample questions are used as an assessment tool to assess the understanding of specific questions as it relates to the standard. It also helps students and teachers explain why an answer is correct and why it may incorrect. Teacher made test and quizzes, conference notes, and exit tickets are used to assess knowledge. Data is extracted from My On and Mathletics. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 $16,00 104,433 $98,659 $0 $0 $2,892,224 x x x x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 5a 5A, 5B, 5C,5D & 5E 5A, 5B, N/A N/A 5A, 5B,5C,5D & 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 308, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/IS 308 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality Parental involvement and school quality will be based on the school's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area and lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand  Elicit volunteers by distributing flyers inviting parents to PS 308 School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 308, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); PS/IS 308 will supporting Home- school relationships by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Attendance celebrations, Honor Roll celebrations Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  2018-19 SCEP-FF 60   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department         learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? CS has worked to improve attendance at PS 308 - Most improved attendance during the 2016-2017 school year. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Increased parent attendance at school events by 20% by June 2019. This will include, but is not limited to, events such as PTA/SLT/CST meetings and CS Forum. We will use sign in sheets and data from 16-17 school year to compare to sign in sheets from 17-18 school year in order to track progress towards this goal. Increased YTD attendance rate 90% school wide by June 2019 . We will aim to achieve this increase by focusing on chronically absent students using the new visions data sorter, along with students who show drastic changes in attendance rates throughout the school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By increasing our parent engagement and continuing to increase our attendance rates, we will be able to create a stronger, more diverse and inclusive community school environment. By increasing parent engagement in school events, enrichment programs and ELT programs, we will be able to incorporate parent skills and input into our services with students. This creates environment where interventions are more informed and effective, where the students and families have a consistent voice in the pursuit of and progress towards our shared goals. By increasing attendance, we hope to ensure that students are consistently in the building and on time. This allows them to be present and ready to learn, which can have a direct effect on academic performance. Several studies have shown a correlation between chronic absenteeism and lower academic achievement. For these reasons, our goal of focusing on the most high risk students and aiming to aid all families in getting their children on time to school will likely have a significant impacting our academic goals. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of SY18-19 SMART Goal Service 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Fly Yoga Fan 4 Kids Kinetics Arts 3rd, 4th 5th 2x week K-8 508 2x week 2x week school day Increase Health and Wellness by June 2019 Increase Health and Wellness by June 2019 Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A community school director will be hired to oversee and lead the implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important activities. The needs of the students are personalized through strategic programming and services as determined by the asset and needs assessment. Mental health screening will take place as needed . The community school director and his team will work as partners with the school to ensure parents and students feel welcome. A liaison between the school and the CBO will help to support and connect to the instructional program. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E School SIG Grant Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  The two CBOs operating at PS 308 Partnership With Children and New York Edge are contracted to provide after school programming and enriching programs for the 2018-2019 school year.. This includes but is not limited to physical fitness, basketball, academic/homework tutoring, animation club and other programs. These programs are open for 6th, 7th and 8th grade and another for k-5 grades. PWC operates as the main CBO in the building, providing mental health services and interventions through a Social Work director, and two MSW social work interns. PWC also provides a licensed social worker at the CSD position along with a full time family outreach worker and a part time family outreach worker. A strong relationship and culture of collaboration has been fostered during 201-2018 school year and will continue to grow during 2018-2019. Surveys, suggestion boxes, and check ins at all school events and meetings will allow coordination with students and families, addressing individual needs of our student body and school community and provide frequent and diverse opportunities for engagement. In addition, the parent suite is advertised as a space for parents to come and volunteer, provide feedback and engage with the school community. CST meetings are scheduled for the 4th Tuesday of the month. From September through June 2019. CSD and members will be present and vocal at all school meetings. Bi weekly morning staff meetings on Tuesdays will serve as regularly scheduled opportunity to present and analyze data as it relates to our shared goals. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The community team will consist of the Principal, AP, Guidance, Parent Coordinators, School Staff, Dean, Teachers, Aides, Security) This list is an expected scope however who ever would like to be included will be allowed. Stephen Anastasia, Sharon Odwin, Guidance, PTA President Ms. King, Ms. Mullins Secretary, Treasurer Mrs. Bass, Parent Coordinators Ms. Felix and Ms. Blake, Student Ambassadors and parent volunteers. meetings take place on the 4th Tuesdays and will include an agenda that include introductions, and inspire discussions, progress. Minutes will be taken for each meeting and shared with participants. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Schedule Adjustments- Some adjustments may need to be fixed in order to accommodate the CST meeting time/day. In addition, the Community School program requires flexibility to incorporate after School (conducted by New York Edge)and enrichment programs (Fan4Kids, Fly Yoga, Rise Athletics). These enrichment programs are incorporated through out the school day and are conducted with the participation and cooperation of the classroom teachers and school staff. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The first Community School Team meeting will take place on 9/26/2018 and will continue on the 4th Tuesday of each month until 6/26/2019 . Outreach for CST meetings will be done by phone, email and flyers in addition to word of mouth/face to face interactions. CST meetings will be included in school announcements/ newsletters and when needed may be rescheduled in order to accommodate CST members. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Clara Cardwell Borough Brooklyn School Number K30 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sharon Odwin Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Richards Jean Teacher/Subject Area Rosamund Martin, Math Teacher/Subject Area Sydonna Morris, ELA Related-Service Provider Asha Mashariki, IEP teacher Superintendent Rahesha Amon Assistant Principal Angela Hammond Coach N/A School Counselor Claudia Sam Brandon Alfred Parent Mrs. J. Mullins Parent Coordinator Lakeea Blake Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 308 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.79% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 9 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 10 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 11 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 K N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? FONTAS AND PINNELL, NYSITELL and PERIODIC ASSESSMENTS are a few of the formative assessments used. Teacher-made assessments are also implemented to identify the strengths and weaknesses of English Language Learners in the four language modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) The assessments are used for the purpose of helping to develop instructional plans as well as teacher and student goals to meet the linguistic, cultural as well as educational needs of all ELLs. teachers keep portfolios of student writing samples to show individual growth over time. Students are required to use portfolios such as journals and learning logs, student work can be the centerpiece in conferences and school data meetings. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  DAILY EXIT TICKETS and Quarterly assessments teacher-made assessments are administered to assess student growth in acquiring new and previously learned concepts. Teachers create collaborative time to analyze student work between educators and administration to discuss what students are producing which can directly lead to ideas for effective student feedback and instruction. Each classroom has data walls of multiple measures of ELL data quarterly to facilitate data driven coaching styles and team planning this provides an opportunity with evidenced based conversations 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PERIODIC ASSESSMENT such as Baseline assessments including the English as a New Language Benchmark test are administered in the fall and spring. In addition, State-mandated assessments, school-wide benchmark exams for the core subjects areas (ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science)also including benchmark teacher made end of unit or chapter test. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures put in place include weekly inquiry sessions with teachers and administrators to review data from the following interventions. AIS - Small group intervention, After and Saturday -school Success Academies, In class differentiation, one to one tutoring. Paras provide Wilson for students with reading deficits. Administration supports teachers by helping them to monitor student progress overtime in a systematic fashion. Teachers can also encourage students to engage in progress monitoring activities with graphic representations of data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] DATA IS COLLECTED AND SHARED AT COMMON PLANNING MEETINGS AND THEN SHARED AT PPT MEETINGS, STUDENTS ARE THEN REFERRED FOR ACADEMIC INTERVENTION 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELA, MATH, CLASSROOM EXIT TICKETS, NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT is used to determine the amount of ELLs are at a particular level based on each grade. This is also used to inform and educate the content area teacher of how many ELLs, at a particular level are in their class, as well as the overall strengths and weaknesses of the ELLs based on their levels, to help content area teacher better differentiate their lessons. The ELA and Math state test scores are also analyzed 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher assess and share with the content area teachers through inquiry and common planning sessions.. ENL teachers provides workshops to allow teachers the opportunity to incorporate strategies to be utilized within the classroom. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL students are grouped by grade K- 8. Their classes are mixed proficiency levels with both ENL and non Enl students. Grades 5-8 travel together for talents and specials. The certified ENL teacher co-teach with the certified content area teachers. The entering, emerging, and transitioning students receive their required instruction in their required integrated and standalone ENL with the provider as per CR Part 154.2. Each student is to receive either stand-alone, integrated or a combination of both services based on their level (as determined by their 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  NYSITELL scores). The ELLs meet in small heterogeneous [mix proficiency levels] groups based on their grade level, from one to two grades (ex: 7th-8th grade or Kind. only) b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher along with an Assistant Principal use the RLAT to determine the number of ELL students, their instructional levels and their required instructional the number of instructional minutes will be provided according to the students' proficiency levels by identifying the number of ELLs in each grade and scheduling their service times around their regular class schedule. ENL Instructional minutes are delivered based on the students’ level as follows: Entering (360 minutes – 4 integrated/4stand-alone), Emerging (360 minutes – 4 integrated/2 stand-alone & 2 flex periods), Transitioning (180 minutes - 2 integrated/ 2 stand-alone &flex periods), Expanding (180 minutes – 4 integrated only), Commanding (90 minutes – 2 flex periods, either integrated, stand alone or a combination of the two) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content in the ENL Program is delivered by using the SIOP lesson plan to ensure that all four modalities are being included in each lesson. Strategies used to help ELLs access each lesson is done by modeling, building scheme/background knowledge, such as Compare and contrast, jigsaw learning, peer teaching. Also students are taught metacognitive strategies in order to think critically about language so that concepts can be applied across content areas, such as recognizing spelling patterns and the meaning of prefixes and suffixes to improve reading fluency and determine the meaning of unfamiliar words. Also, building awareness of how the meaning of words may change across content areas. In addition, Think-Pair-Shares, Journal writing and self-assessments help ELLs to be more reflective and aware about their strengths and challenges, which help to build confidence and improve learning. The use of graphic organizers help ELLs to structure their notes and organize their ideas, music and video helps to bring lessons to life, and the use of their native language is also used to support English language development by making connections between the languages. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their home language both formally and informally. Students are given opportunities to read short texts in their native languages, as well as are asked to write short texts in their native languages. Students are also encouraged to speak and write down both the English and the translated word for vocabulary they are learning. In addition, they are provided with and are encouraged to use bilingual dictionaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our SIFE students are supported by providing them with foundational learning skills such as phonemic awareness, alphabet sound symbol relationships, and sentence and paragraph structure through scaffolds, illustrations and graphic organizers. The Newcomer students utilize home language to foster vocabulary and academic development growth through scaffolds and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  strategies. Learning through a cooperative learning environment. A student's native language will most likely have a strong influence on the way that student learns English. Understanding how this language is similar to or different from English will help you focus on troublesome areas. This influence can provide extra support, such as the case of English and Spanish Cognates (education and educación). The influence also may lead to some ongoing errors in English, which will become evident with time and repeated use by students who have the same native language. Developing students will also utilize various scaffolds and strategies to support language development through a cooperative and individualized setting. These students will be encouraged through the use of complex texts to support language acquisition. We recognize our long-term ELLS needs additional support services and enrichment programs. These programs are geared towards academic growth using data to focus on areas strengths and weaknesses. Our school designates at least 5 students per class to work with one on one as an intervention support these students are known as our focus five. Our former ELLS require support and attention to their unique needs. In addition to language acquisition, English-Language learners are asked to merge their cultures, backgrounds, and experiences with those of their new environment in order to achieve academic success. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers scaffolds grade specific materials with the use of graphic organizers to support ELLs and SWDs. In addition the on-line vocabulary program Quizlet and Google translation tools are also utilized. Expeditionary Learning for ELA is used and Go math is used along with Engage New York. Trade and bilingual books are used to support background knowledge of of students language and culture. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? :All ELL-SWD are mainstreamed for PE, specials and AIE. Sp. Ed. and ENL teachers differentiate the core curriculum for our IEP students so that they can achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. Teachers employ the following strategies and best practices: vocabulary development through visualization, use of technology, pre and post unit tests to drive instruction, rotational model, embedded assessment through exit tickets, the ENL provider meets with the content area teachers to discuss curricular expectations and share techniques. The ENL teacher pulls students out for more intense individualized language support to work on specific language deficits determined through small and whole group instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs include, AIS Math , reading and literacy programs, as well as MYOn and Mathletics for continuous ELA and Math based skill building. SUCCESS Academy is available and ESL subgroups are determined by gender, SIFE, low economic, and Hispanic. Writing, speaking and reading are used constantly. Vocabulary sheets include a column for translations and pictures. Students are given these opportunities within their classroom, library and small group sessions with their ENL or intervention providers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2017-2018 ENL AFTER-SCHOOL WHICH FOCUSED ON WRITING AND LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included and have access to all school programs. Some of these programs include our steel pan, dance, Sports and Arts, Success Academy, Basketball Clinic, Boys Mentoring group (BMG), Deans Exclusive, Early risers, Honors classes, Tae Kwan Doe and STEM. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. programs such a s Tutormate, Learnzillian and Animation is available to our ENL students. Various Google services are available such as Google DOCS, translate and sheets are utilized with class lessons. Also Quizlet, MyOn, for auditory practice, Iready, Mathletics, STARFALL to reinforce phonetic and auditory skills. Our ELLs have access to computers or ipads in ENL and content area classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL program it is supported to encourage students to see connections between their languages and thus, to better understand how languages are structured and organized, talk to ELLs about their home language. There is a home language survey distributed when students are registered. Students are allowed to speak their own language and translate through devices such as tablets, computers and laptops. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/resource support and correspond to ELL's ages and grades by customizing individualized push in and pull out programs to meet the New York State academic policy mandates for ELLs. The ELL instructor's plan collaboratively meet two times per week with co-teachers and administrators to ensure rigorous instruction. They align their instructional practices to the blueprint for English Language Learners Success. The school strategically selects research based resources to anchor the instruction. Various modalities and assessment tools are used to track students' achievement and ensure that all ELL students are performing at their level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the summer our present and entering ELLs are invited to participate in a special program: During a parent orientation is held to greet the parents. A video representation of our school is shared. July Parent orientation, ELL parents are recognized and invited to invited to our LAP meetings and on SLT. Our after-school ELL program promotes speaking, listening, reading and writing as well as providing Math and ELA test prep. Each year our Foreign language and ENL Teachers coordinate a Multicultural Night during which the ethnic music, dance, dress, culture and foods of our students are celebrated and enjoyed. the principal, AP Guidance counselor, SBS team, teachers, ENL teacher, parent coordinator and PTA are involved in the planning process. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? KOREAN LANGUAGE IS OFFERED AS AN ELECTIVE. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development for all teachers of ELLs will include a PD on tips and teaching best practices for teaching ELLs in the content area classroom 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT BINDER IS MAINTAINED FOR ALL TEACHERS, A LOG OF ASSISTANCE IS KEPT TO RECORD ALL PROFESSIONAL LEARNING ACTIVITIES, THE ENL TEACHER ATTENDS PERIODIC TRAINING THROUGHOUT THE SCHOOL YEAR AND TURNKEY INFORMATION DURING COMMON PLANNING SESSIONS TO CONTENT AREA TEACHERS, TEACHERS ARE ENGAGE IN CONVERSATIONS AROUND INSTRUCTIONAL VIDEOS WHICH SHOW HOW TO SUPPORT THE LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT OF ENL Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The teachers schedule parent meetings with ELL parents are scheduled between the the ENL providers and the teachers of ENL. the goal is to discuss the goals and progress of each student. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the start of school, hold a know your school night to have parents complete forms. Translators should be available. This is a good opportunity to share information on school supplies and other expectations, and enlist parents and guardians as school/classroom volunteers. When dealing with family members with little or no English proficiency, providing forms and notes in their native language is very helpful. When translating, caution should be taken to ensure the correct phrases are used. In this regard, reliance on Internet-based translation sites or computer software programs should be avoided. When using district translators, accuracy, due to dialect, is sometimes an issue. Some translators do a great job of oral translations but their translation of written material may not be proficient. Arrange for parent teacher conferences at times that are convenient for parents. Some parents of ELL students may work evening shifts. Make sure to send home conference notices in the home language and tell parents translators will be on-hand. Schedule the parent teacher conferences so parents can make one trip to the school covering all their children's conferences. Parent nights are a useful way to engage family members in school activities. When organizing such events, it is helpful to keep the following in mind. - Involve ELL students as part of the program to encourage family member attendance. o Be sure to send home bilingual notes announcing parent nights. In addition, personal contact with the families is also beneficial. This might be a role home-school liaison staff members could fulfill, if available. - Individually greet and say goodbye to attending families. -Celebrate the achievements of outstanding ELL students. -Survey those attending, asking for input on student programming, adult programming, and satisfaction with the current programming efforts. • To build rapport between the parents and teachers, parents could be asked if they would be willing to give the teachers lessons on ethnic dancing or music or cooking popular ethnic recipes. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sharon Odwin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: CLARA CARDWELL School DBN: 16K308 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) SHARON ODWIN Title Principal Angela Hammond Assistant Principal Lakeea Blake Parent Coordinator Andrea Richards Jean ENL/Bilingual Teacher MS. J. MULLINS Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A Claudia Sam/ Brandon Alfred RAHESHA AMON N/a N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 16K308 School Name: Clara CardwellSchool Superintendent: RaheshaAmon The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lorianne Taylor ENL Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The HLIS is used to keep track the number of prospective ELLs who may need to receive services. ATS reports provide necessary information regarding the ELLs testing history and biographical information. The HLIS and Emergency contact cards are provided in the preferred language of the parent/guardian. Surveys are conducted for all Newcomer ELL families during the initial orientation and then follow up surveys are given throughout the year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bangali Chinese Spanish 1 2 2 5 .3% .61% .61% 1.67% 1 2 2 5 .3% .61% .61% 1.67% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families welcome letter to parents September-October Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will use the DOE translation service Monthly newsletter N/A N/A monthly N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL parent welcome meeting 10/1 Orientation meeting for ELL parents monthly (upon enrollment) parent teacher meetings quarterly interpretation service(s)? over-the-phone interpretation service provided by the DOE over-the-phone interpretation service meeting provided by the DOE over-the-phone interpretation meeting provided by the DOE N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use robocall to contact parents in the event of an emergency Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will have PDs throughout the year for the LAC to turnkey information regarding translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) There is translated signage at the entrance of the school as well as by the Parent Coordinator's office. Also translated brochures/flyers/letters are available for parents in the main office, by the parent coordinator, as well as the ENL teacher. Parents and guardians are informed of these available resources at PTA meetings and are made visible in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Once a year, during the Parent-Teacher meetings parents are invited to complete a survey about the school. For the upcoming school year parents will be invited to participate in completing surveys throughout the year. Such services will include an evaluative survey for the over-the-phone interpretation services, face-to-face interpretation, as well as their experience with the accessibility to information related to in school events, such as frequency of letters home in their native language and invitations to participate in meetings (i.e. PTA) Also, verbal/ over the phone instead of paper surveys may be implemented in order to receive feedback more efficiently from parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78 
