2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 22K326 P.S. 326 Principal: COLLEEN DUCEY 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 22K326 P.S. 326 3322000010326 Pre-K, K, 1, 2 and SE 1800 Utica Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11234 718-241-4828 Phone Number: 718-763-5567 Fax: Colleen M. Ducey cducey@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Colleen M. Ducey Jennifer DeLuca Susan Clasp-Cumberbatch Jennifer DeLuca Tracy Kennedy Ifill Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Melissa Fontanelli District Information Geographical District: 22 Superintendent: Julia Bove Superintendent’s Office Address: 5619 Flatlands Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11234 Superintendent’s Email Address: JBove@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-968-6115 Fax: 718-968-6152 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn South Executive Director: M. DeGovia Executive Director’s Office Address: 415 89th Street 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Email Address: Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-759-4862 Fax: 718-759-4863 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Colleen M. Ducey Jennifer DeLuca Susan Clasp Cumberbatch Bonnie Davies Tracy Kennedy Ifill NA SamarisPascal MelidaFoster Natalie Trotman Faradja Theodore Sara Corvoisier *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Chairperson/Parent Member/Staff Member Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Staff Member Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P. S. 326 is to provide our students with an exemplary education in a supportive and nurturing school environment. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 326 is a Title I Early Childhood Center located in Flatbush, Brooklyn. We have a student population of approximately 220 students enrolled from Pre-K to Grade 2. Our multicultural population originates from areas such as the Carribbean Islands, Mexico and the Middle East. The indoor and outdoor environment of our school is warm and inviting. A beautiful mural is painted on the outside of our school building and it serves as an invitation to our entire school community. The inside of our school is decorated with our students’ work, as well as bulletin boards that reflect our schools initiatives and special projects. The entire atmosphere of our school reflects a sense of respect, dedication and love of learning. PS 326 works collaboratively with our local Community Based Organizations to welcome families in the neighborhood to visit us and tour our school in the spring before school begins. We also work collaboratively with arts organizations to expose our young students to all art disciplines including theater and the ballet. In addition, we partner with the New York City Food Bank and Penny Harvest to teach our students to be charitable and to develop social and emotional awareness in our young students. PS 326 has a very strong learning environment. Results of our Learning Environment Survey shows that for the past three years in a row we have surpassed the citywide average in every category both on the parent and the teacher surveys. Our last three Quality Reviews have also yielded “Well Developed” results and we have highly qualified and dedicated teachers. Our students enjoy coming to school and we have a very good daily attendance rate of 94.2%. Our challenges include the fact that our school is a leased building and located approximately a mile from our students’ homes. Students are required to take a school bus each day to and from school and therefore, we do not see the parents of our students often. Since many of our families work multiple shifts we have begun hosting parent events at various times of the day including mornings, afternoons and weekends. We will continue to monitor our data sources and modify our plans accordingly. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are an early Childhood Center. All of our students are in grades Pre-K through 2nd. Much like middle schools a third of our population turns over every year. Like other schools, we have the same sub groups including SWD students, ELL students and Title I students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our Framework for Great Schools data from school year 2016 shows a score of 4.47 which indicates that teachers responded positively to questions about rigorous instruction and a 4.74 in collaborative teaching. Our school quality snapshot also shows a 4.58 to questions about effective leadership and a 4.71 indicates that parents and teachers responded positively to questions about trust. We are working on improving strong family-community ties and hosting more opportunities for parents to attend school functions and be involved with their child's education. Over the past three years, our data shows that our school has closed the achievement gap for many students. Our initial assessment data shows that only 51% of kindergarten students are on grade level at the end of kindergarten. By the end of grade one, our data shows that approximately 77% of students are on grade level and by the completion of 2018-19 CEP 10  grade two, approximately 82% of all students are achieving on grade level in literacy. This year, our focus is to develop our students’ ability to use content vocabulary, talk respectfully and communicate effectively both orally and in writing to express critical thinking. In addition, on-going staff development is a priority and our staff is engaged in differentiated professional development that is directly linked to raising student achievement. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 22K326 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 191 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 6 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 77.0% % Reduced Lunch 16.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 16.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 17.1 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 38 38 92.8% 7.3% 25.1% 64.4% 13.1% 2.1% 2 0% 6.3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) P.S. 326's strengths are evident in an analysis of last year's NYC Math BOY and EOY assessments. Strengths in kindergarten were the following traits: counting, counting on and comparing numbers. In grade one, analysis of this data shows that our strengths were: comparing equations, solving problems using mental math and counting numbers 85-120. In grade two, our strengths were solving problems using equal addends and two step addition and subtraction problems within 100. 2) In a multi year analysis of our students' data, we know that students are starting at the beginning level each year due to mathematics being a subject which builds on the prior year's foundation. Kindergarten weaknesses include extended counting and equations. In grade one, our students had the greatest difficulty with concepts of solving word problems and properties of operations. In grade two, subtraction of three digit numbers and place value and operations caused the greatest challenges for our students. Longitudinal data also indicates that over a two year period, our students weaknesses become a strength by the end of the following grade year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% grade two students will improve at least two levels in at least three out of five traits on the end of year (EOY) New York City math assessment as compared to the beginning of year (BOY) math assessment. Last year approximately 90% of students gained at least one level in at least four out of five traits. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional materials will include: Envisions math kits, Performance tasks, problem of the week and differentiated instruction based on student needs. All grade two students Administrators and teachers First semester Envisions units 1-3, Second semester units 4-6 and third semester units 7-9 Students including SWDs and ELLs will be grouped by need for guided math and small group instruction; ESL and AIS providers will push into classrooms to support student learning. ELL students and SWDs September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers Ongoing workshops will continue to be provided to our parent community on math problem solving and strategies for the early childhood grades. Administrators and teachers All Families October: Family Math workshop for all families and January-April math workshops for ELL families on Saturdays The home school connection will be supported by the Building Blocks technology program which facilitates opportunities for students to work on math problem solving strategies at home with their families. All students and their families September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 14  Students and their families will be able to log onto the Building Blocks and Envisions programs at home. In addition, K-2 students will practice Envisions Math problem solving using the Envisions digital series and follow up with math apps that will be purchased for use at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The students primary teacher will be responsible for providing math instruction on a daily basis ● All out of classroom service providers will push in or pull out students based on needs. ● Schedules are shared with all staff members and are aligned to the needs of the students ● Instructional materials including Envisions Math, Building Blocks, and the units of study the teachers created based on the CCLS and integrated into our curriculum. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students will gain at least one benchmark level by November, another by January, another by March and another by May. All students’ math benchmarks will be assessed using the specific rubric for that mathematics strand on problem solving. Scores will be recorded on Google docs to be viewed by the entire school community. By the end January, the midpoint benchmark will indicate that students will have gained approximately one benchmark level between the Beginning of Year (BOY) testing and the midyear assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Problem of the week and rubrics. Monitoring of student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1) Analysis of our NYSESLAT and NYSITEL data form 2016-2017 shows that 58% of all ELL students grew at least one English Proficiency level between the beginning of the year and the year of the year. Analysis of Fountas and Pinnell shows that of the 42 ELL students we had in grades K, 1 & 2, only three grade one students and two grade two students are counted among their grade's lowest third. 2) An analysis of our school year 2016-2017, Fountas & Pinnell data shows that only 50% of our grade one and two students are entering their grade on level in reading. An analysis of all of our students' speaking and listening skills in kindergarten also indicates that our students begin school approximately eight months behind the peers in receptive language and ten months behind their peers in expressive language skills. The 2016-2017 NYSESLAT student data showed that students scored higher in the listening and speaking modalities and needed additional support to improve reading and writing skills in order to attain English proficiency. The 2015 and 2016 school wide initial assessment conducted within the first ten days of the school year showed that ELL students need additional support with recognizing alphabet letters and their corresponding sounds. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will support all students including students with disabilities by providing differentiated grouping for students and inclusive workshops for their parents that results in 75% of students with disabilities improving at least one level in at least three out of five traits on the End of Year (EOY) New York City ELA performance task as compared to the Beginning of Year (BOY) ELA task. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students with Disabilities will benefit from increased exposure to print and language. A print-rich environment will include access to books and reference materials, labels, posters and student work on bulletin boards. Word walls will be visible in every classroom and will be organized around a number of concepts, including alphabet and phonetic sounds, new vocabulary words, sight words and writing structures. Teachers, paras and support staff September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Teachers, Paras and Students September 2018-June2019 Teachers and students Our parent coordinator provides a lending library to parents which includes games, activities and puzzles that focus on improving basic skills and oral language development. All Families Professional development will be provided to teachers on creating an environment of respect and rapport and strategies that assist in addressing the needs of ELLs and SWDs. Teachers and students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June2019 Teachers, Parents and parent coordinator Administrators and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A student's native language will most likely have a strong influence on the way that a student learns English. Understanding how this language is similar to or different from English will help us to focus on troublesome areas. Families will be invited to participate in our Saturday workshops that will provide them with support in academic language which will in turn help their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● All teachers will differentiate during all ELA and math lessons. ● PD will be provided to teachers on how to model of how to use sounds, structures and vocabulary correctly in English. ● Students will use self-assessments and peer checklists to critique their work and the work of their peers. ● Various materials will be available to parents in the lending library. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 17  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place monthly as we work in horizontal or vertical teams to examine student work. Reading and math unit tests will be monitored monthly as well. All data will be placed on Google Docs so all members of the community can see it. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas & Pinell benchmarks will be given bi-monthly to determine progress in reading. Envisions math performance tasks will be used to monitor mastery of math standards. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) Our Framework for Great Schools report from 2017 indicates a score of 96 in collaborative teachers which is well above the citywide average of 88. Our Teacher Development Coach has assisted us in looking at aggregate Danielson data to determine trends in teacher practice. These trends indicate that teacher practice is improving in the area of Questioning and Discussion which was our area most in need last year. During our 2017 Initial Planning Conferences each teacher set two professional goals for the 2017-2018 school year. Progress toward meeting these goals was assessed in January and opportunities for professional development was specifically offered based on the goals set by each staff member in collaboration with their administrators. 2) Analysis of our NYC BOY writing Performance Task from the 2017-2018 school year shows that our kindergarten students had difficulty with conventions and letter sound relationships. In grade one, analysis of of Performance task results from last year shows that students had the greatest weakness in grammar and usage. Grade two weaknesses include having the stamina to write a well organized three paragraph essay. Units of study will have specific rubrics that will target students' writing in that genre. We will also use peer checklists and assist students in editing their own work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grade one and grade two teachers will enhance instruction that results in 80% of all grade one and two students increasing their Fountas & Pinnell reading level by three benchmark levels as measured by the nationally recognized Fountas and Pinnell leveled reading library. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and paras will engage in study groups, book clubs and socratic seminars aligned to their interest survey and needs assessment. Teachers and paras Professional learning opportunities will include strategies for addressing the needs of all learners including SWDs and ELLs. Teachers and Paras Professional learning will identify ways to strengthen the home school connection through Family workshops based on the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers Paras and parents Study Groups will adhere to norms and protocols that facilitate the sharing of thoughts and ideas and all voices will be valued and heard. Administrators and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement January 2019-April 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Family Literacy in October, Family Math in December, Family Science in February and Family Social Studies in March 2019 January 2019-June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers and parents Administrators and Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Raz-Kids is a great home family school connection tool. This web based program offers students a leveled library on all topics and in all genres. Students and parents can log on to Raz-kids and determine how students are scoring on comprehension questions and write a review of the book. Parents and teachers will review student progress together at Parent Teacher Conferences in September, November, March and May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional books selected based on teacher interest and need. Teachers will meet in horizontal and vertical teams during the Monday professional development period at least once a month to examine student work. Teachers will create newsletters and progress reports to inform parents of school events and achievements. Student work samples and student portfolios will be collected on a monthly basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student progress reports will be sent home in October, November, January, March and June. These progress reports will indicate rubric level improvements to parents. Danielson data will be monitored by teachers and administrators after each round of observations to determine strengths and weaknesses and next steps. Teacher survey and parent survey will indicate progress in improving our home school connection. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student writing samples and analysis of rubrics will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) Data from the NYC 2016-2017 School Survey indicates a score of 97 in Effective School Leadership. Teachers at our school support each other in taking on leadership roles. Teachers take turns presenting to their colleagues at Monday PD meetings in their area of expertise. 2) Administrators and teachers collaboratively reviewed ELA and Math benchmark data from the 2016-2017 school year to identify gaps in student learning and set goals to address these needs. Teachers set two professional goals based on their 2016-2017 Danielson observations and feedback as well as student achievement data. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will share best practices with their colleagues and present at least one professional learning session during the academic school year. Staff participation and implementation of new strategies will be monitored during inter-visitation sessions. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Data sources examined to determine student learning gaps and professional learning needs. Administrators and Teachers Teachers will be provided will professional learning opportunities including BFS pd, study groups and school based professional development to further their professional growth in order to impact student achievement including SWDs and ELLs. Administrators and Teachers September 20178- October 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers Ambassadors will host open classrooms at least once a week and meet with their colleagues to model and share best practices. Administrators and Teachers Teachers collaborate with their administrators and colleagues in a risk free environment in order to improve their professional practice. Administrators and Teachers At least one Monday per month September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ambassador teachers will host family workshops in all academic areas so parents can observe the content and methodologies we use at school to help their children at home. Family literacy will take place in October. Family math will take place in December. Family Science and Family Social Studies will take place in February and April respectively. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators will provide differentiated professional development to all staff members. Teachers will engage in network professional development opportunities as well as activities provided by the administration. Teachers will also engage in district wide Ambassador Mondays once per month and then turn key this professional development to their colleagues upon returning to school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 23  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored at least four times per year as aligned to Danielson observation cycles. Round one of the observation cycles will be completed in November 2018 and Round 2 will be completed by the end of January 2019. Round 3 will be completed by February 2019 and Round 4 completed by the beginning of May 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using the Danielson Rubric, teacher and administrator conferences and next steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) The 2017 Framework for Great Schools data indicates that our school received a score of 97 in Strong Family-Community Ties. Our Learning Environment Survey from the 2016-2017 report indicates that 94% of parents feel that our school is a safe and supportive place for their children to learn. 2) Although we vary the times that workshops are offered at our school, due to parents' work schedules, parents often state that they cannot attend. Families have approached the administration and asked for information to be shared on our website so parents can view meetings, awards and assemblies on our website. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In collaboration with the 2018-2019 Parents' Association, we will increase the amount of families who attend our school functions by 25%. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will explore digital outlets that will allow us to put Parents Association meetings and other helpful workshops online for parents to view. Parents and students We will consider technology like Google Hangouts and SKYPE to host meetings. We will use video conferencing or YouTube channels for parents to view important information. Parents and students In order to improve parent involvement in the school, translators will be provided at all meetings. Parents and students Parents will have an opportunity to learn side by side with their child and receive guidance from teachers on how to support their child’s instruction at home. Parents and students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers Administrators and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Title I plan and budget ● Digital media ● Technology programs including StarFall and Raz-Kids. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 26  ● Participation will monitored using attendance sign in sheets at workshops and the number of log ins recorded at a digital event. ● By the half way point of this program we will report parent and usage data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored digitally by seeing how many people log onto our digital platforms or school website to view information. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring at least one benchmark below grade level as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Students scoring at least 20 points below the class average on Envisions unit tests Students scoring below the class average on science unit tests Students scoring below the class average on social studies unit tests Students referred to the SAT by the classroom teacher or parent. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated lessons and guided reading instruction. Repeated lessons and guided math instruction. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small groups When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Small groups During the school day Repeated instruction and close readings. Small groups During the school day Repeated instruction and close readings Small groups During the school day Counseling sessions One to one or small group During the school day 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of June 2018, we have two students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing are provided with school supplies, uniforms and any other items they need to be successful in school. Our school guidance counselor works closely with the families and the shelter social workers to ensure stability at school. Transportation supports are also offered to families and homework assistance is also provided. School trips and functions are paid for using Title I funds. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). PS 326 is a Title I school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  Students in Temporary Housing are provided with counseling with our school guidance counselor. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. PS 326 is a Title i school. 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers at PS 326 are highly qualified. We maintain a high level of professionalism and teachers are dedicated to our students and school. When recruiting new staff members, PS 326 forms a hiring team and we investigate the credentials of all candidates. We ensure that the teacher we hire has completed all state and city requirements for certification. We provide all teachers with assistance and a mentor. We have grade leaders that support new teacher development and planning. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff members participate in professional development sessions on Monday afternoons. Topics include looking at student work using protocols; unit planning that reflects the Common Core standards and shifting classroom practice to support students in meeting Common Core standards. Our instructional focus this year provides on-going professional development to teachers that supports students using content vocabulary, talking respectfully and communicating effectively both orally and in writing. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents are invited to an open house and are able to see and tour our facility as well as meet with staff members. Parent handbooks are distributed which inform families of the academic expectations of the grade the child will enter in the Fall. Parents of turning five students who attend local Community Based pre-schools are invited to attend our open house events as well. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Based on our shared vision of how early childhood students learn best, we agree to assess students in one to one, small group or whole class formative and summative assessments. We also assess students’ reading and writing abilities in a performance based one to one conference which provides instructional next steps and actionable feedback to students. All student assessment data is entered on Google Docs and all staff members have access to viewing this data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 118,118 65,788 12,366 0 1,213,551 X X X X Rigorous Instruction Supportive Env Collaborative Teach RigorousInsturction 2018-19 CEP 32  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 33   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 326, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS 326] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 35 Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 CEP 36  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 326] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 39  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 40  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The focus of our Title III instructional program at PS 326 will be based on the Common Core Literacy Standards and the Balanced Literacy approach which combines the best elements from phonics instruction and the whole language approach. Our supplemental Title III program will be conducted in English and will include reading, writing, speaking and listening activities using technology and focusing on phonics, vocabulary, fluency and word recognition. Academic intervention services will be provided for all students attending the Saturday Academy using the following programs: Wilson Fundations, Great Leaps and Recipe for Reading, at no cost to the program. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: All beginner, low intermediate, transitioning, advanced and proficient ELL students will be served. In addition all former ELLs will also be invited to attend the Saturday Academy. Schedule and Duration: The Saturday Academy will take place on 10 Saturdays in January, February, March and April for ELL students and their families from 9-12. Language of Instruction, types of teachers and materials: The language of instruction will be English and all four teachers will service the following students in small groups: -Six students at the Entering level -Three students at the Emerging level -Eight students at the Transitioning level -Eight students at the Expanding level -Six students at the Commanding level All Entering and Emerging students will be in one class and Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding in another class. There will be two teachers with each class at all times to facilitate individualized targeted small group instruction. The ELL teacher will switch classes with one early childhood teacher so that she works with each group for 1.5hours a week. When the ELL teacher rotates to the other class, one early childhood teacher will rotate to the classroom that the ELL teacher just left. Materials: The materials that will be purchased with Title III funds will include: non-fiction texts to support the units of study in science and social studies. 2018-19 CEP 41  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The teachers will participate in workshops provided by the BSFC and District 22's Ambassador workshop series. In addition, teachers who are working this Saturday program will attend 2 two hour workshops at our school. These workshops will be given by our Principal, Colleen Ducey, a former ELL teacher and our current ELL teacher, Galina Aleksandovich. The focus of these workshops will be "How to support the ELL student in the classroom." These workshops will help teachers plan appropriate lessons and coordinate instruction with classroom teachers. They will also focus on ways to improve language acquisition in young students. Teachers will become knowledgeable in using the Wilson Fundations program as well as Great Leaps and how to use data to match students' weaknesses with the appropriate remedial program. Teachers will also create materials and assessments that will ensure all students have an opportunity to improve their receptive and expressive language skills. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to our student component, our Saturday Academy includes a parent component. All families of our ELL students are invited to attend all family sessions facilitated by our bilingual staff members Sarah Corvoisier, our school guidance counselor and Melida Foster, our Parent Coordinator. Translated invitations are backpacked home with the students. Rationale: Parents are invited to participate in workshops that promote home and school communication in order to improve student achievement. Schedule and Duration: The sessions begin with a needs assessment survey used to identify the language proficiency level and the specific needs of our ELL parent community. The data gleaned from these surveys is used to determine translation needs and depth of our presentations. Topics: The first three workshops will take place simultaneously with the student component and will focus on topics including: communicating effectively with your child's teacher, student feedback and how to help your child with their homework. The second series of three workshops will focus on the Common Core standards at the Early Childhood level. We will also look at the instructional expectations for students in grades K-2. The final session will focus on how to support your child in content based learning that is consistent with the way the children learn at school. Notification of parents: Each week, the Parent Coordinator, our school guidance counselor and other bilingual staff members will assist in the translation of these workshops and provide 2018-19 CEP 42 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities guidance in being involved in their child's education. Translation funds will also be used, in addition to Title III funds to support the parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. This allocation will cover the cost of all employees working the Saturday academy. Professional Development This allocation will cover the cost of all supplemental and instructional materials specifically selected for our ELL students including: leveled texts, paper, pencils, art supplies, and non-fiction texts. 0 0 Parent Involvement 0 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7500  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1200 $2,466 0 0 $1200 $12,366 2018-19 CEP 43  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 22 School Name PS 326 Borough Brooklyn School Number 326 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Colleen M. Ducey Coach None ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Galina Aleksandrovich Teacher/Subject Area Emma Nagel/K Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer DeLuca/AIS Related-Service Provider Katherine Allison Superintendent Julia Bove Assistant Principal Melissa Fontanelli Coach None School Counselor Sarah Corvosier Parent Leroy Anderson Parent Coordinator Melida Foster Field Support Center Staff Member Cheryl Watson Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 176 2018-19 CEP 44 Total number of ELLs 41 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.30%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 326 is an Early Childhood Center. We assess the early literacy skills of all students, including ELLs, through Fountas and Pinnell, Rigby Benchmarks, New York City Performance tasks, as well as looking at student work (writing samples). ELLs are also assessed through NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. Data gleaned from these assessments shows that many incoming students need additional support in all four modalities - listening, speaking, reading and writing. Beginning ELL students, entering Kindergarten for the first time, are tested using the One Word Picture Vocabulary Test (OWPVT). Students are tested both expressively and receptively and traditionally have scored approximately, 1 year below their chronological age when testing receptive language skills and two years below their chronological age when testing expressive language skills. Therefore, explicit language instruction, with a focus on academic and social vocabulary, as well as grammar usage, is taught daily. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 45  All classroom teachers receive professional development on differentiating instruction based on student needs. Students are grouped for all ELA and math lessons as well as other content area subjects. Explicit vocabulary instruction is taught during every lesson. The ELL teacher pushes in to all classes to support our ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ELL programs by analyzing NYSESLAT data, Rigby Benchmarks, writing samples, science and social studies assessments and vocabulary assessments on a monthly basis. Our students are assessed, monitored and flexibly grouped on a daily basis by their classroom teacher and other service providers. Our School Leadership Team and parents are kept up to date on the progress of all students, including ELLs, at our monthly meetings and through bi-monthly family progress reports sent home in the families' native languages. Parents are kept up to date on their child's progress through bi-monthly progress reports which are sent home. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data helps us make decisions about reorganization for the following year. It also helps us match students with appropriate the strengths or appropriate staff members. However, formative assessments that we examine on a monthly basis help us make decisions about teaching and learning. Formative assessments also provide information on our students strengths and weaknesses as well as their next steps. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students, including our ELLs, are assessed monthly in all core subject areas. This data is used to differentiate instruction and scaffold academic vocabulary to make content more accessible to ELLs and SWDs. As appropriate, based on this data, ELLs receive Tier I interventions in their classrooms in small group instruction. Tier I interventions include peer tutoring, guided reading, and software programs that assist in the targeted area. Students who still have difficulty are referred for Tier II academic intervention services. All Tier II students receive extra academic intervention services outside of their classroom and are re-evaluated monthly for continuation or discontinuance of services. Tier II services include: Wilson fundations, Great Leaps and targeted math assistance. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our data shows that newly admitted ELLs and children who are the oldest in their families, are usually at the Beginning level across all modalities. Students who have siblings in school or have attended pre-K programs, usually score in the itnermediate or advanced levels in all modalities. Spring 2016 NYSESLAT data shows that 11 students passed the NYESLAT and 14 students achieved the Advanced level. Twelve students moved to the Intermediate level and 8 students remained at a beginning level. In all, 82% of students advanced at least one level last school year. New admits testing in September 2016 on the NYSITELL shows that seven students scored at the entering level, two students scored at the emergent level, one student scored at the transitional level and three students scored out on the NYSITELL. When comparing our students' achievement from last year to this year, we find that less students passed the NYSESLAT due to the duration and difficulty of the test. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Dissemination of data to all constituents including parents and staff members helps us make informed decisions about materials, curriculum, assessments and AIS programs. This data also informs how we use our Title III monies and what programs we provide for our ELL students and their families. Our school wide data is discussed at School Leadership Team meetings, Parents' Association meetings, Faculty Conferences and Monday's PD sessions. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 46  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 326 provides a small school setting that offers a more personal cooperative environment for students, staff and parents. Students are homogeneously grouped and actively engaged in learning using a variety of modalities. In addition to whole group teacher directed lessons, students are also provided with small group and individualized attention. Daily activities involve working with manipulatives, participating in listening centers, creative writing and integrating computer technology to reinforce and enrich all areas of the curriculum. ESL is provided through a hybrid push in/pull out model across all grades. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students receive access to academic rigorous standards based instruction. To ensure that we are meeting the needs of our ELL students and providing opportunities for them to achieve at high levels, the school will be accountable for ongoing assessment of our ELLs in all academic content areas, as well as language development, to inform instruction. All ENL instruction is delivered through Common Core aligned, content area instruction. In addition, our free standing ENL program using the push in model in compliance with CR-Part 154. Our Assistant Principal programs our ENL student in STARS and works cooperatively with our ELL teacher to determine the correct number of minutes each ENL child is entitled to. Our free standing ESL program is appropriately and adequately staffed by a highly qualified ESL teacher who is fully licensed and certified. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ELL students receive access to academic rigorous standards based instruction. To ensure that we are meeting the needs of our ELL students and providing opportunities for them to achieve at high levels, the school will be accountable for ongoing assessment of our ELLs in academic content areas, as well as language development, to inform instruction. All ENL instruction is delivered through Common Core aligned, content area instruction. The ELL teacher attends the grade level conferences and works collaboratively with the classroom teachers on the Common Core units of study. Our ELL teacher levels materials that match students achievement levels and guided reading abilities. Our ELL teacher reviews the units vocabulary and posts pictures that assist students in incorporating this content vocabulary into their speaking, reading and writing assignments. ELL students became so confident in their learning of vocabulary and unit objectives that they recite to their peers what they had learned from their ELL teacher. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not have a dual language or bilingual program. However, we do incorporate native language scaffolds into instruction. As appropriate, we employ bilingual staff and translation services for student evaluation. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 CEP 47  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Since PS 326 is a Pre-K to Second Grade Early Childhood Center, we do not have any SIFE students, ELLs in years 4 through 6 or long term ELLs. All of our students are considered new comers, since they have all been in school for less than three years. Our instructional methods listed below are designed to meet the needs of our students. We continue to support our former ELL students with the appropriate scaffolds. Former ELLs receive transitional and ongoing ESL support when appropriate and necessary for two years, utilizing ESL strategies including TPR, Balanced Literacy and the Natural Approach. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL strategies used are: TPR, Balanced Literacy Model, Natural Approach including daily read alouds, nursery rhymes, chants, and finger plays. The teaching of reading is based on a Balanced Literacy approach which combines the best elements of phonics instruction and the whole language approach. We teach children to read through explicit phonics instruciton, by sounding out unfamiliar words and by daily exposure to literature and attention to comprehension. Our ELL program is aligned to grade level units of study. We encourage students to discuss their daily experiences, to improve their listening and speaking skills and increase vocabulary development. Children are exposed to all literary genres as well as content area instruction in science and social studies. All materials ELL SWD focused and grade and age appropriate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Methodologies appropriate for special needs students including tactile and sensory stimulation and the use of manipulatives are incoprorated into the instrction of our ELL special education students. Our ESL teacher is familiar with the IEP goals of each special education student and collaborates with the classroom teacher to track progress and design appropriate instruction. Students are grouped flexibly in small groups determined by the child's strengths and next steps in learning. Lessons are provided with the appropriate scaffolds so all students are successful. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have a team of dedicated specialists who work individually with students who have been identified as special needs or needing academic support and intervention services in literacy and math. We will continue to utilize on-going assessment of our ELLs to drive instruction. Students will be placed in flexible groups based on assessment used to address students' needs, different learning styles and diverse linguistic backgrounds. Fountas and Pinnell will be used to assess students' reading level and a portfolio for each student where reading responses and writing samples are collected will be assessed periodically to ensure each students' growth in all four modalities. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school is utilizing Reading Streets and Recipe for Reading Phonics Program for literacy instruction. We will use Envisions math which incorporates problem solving and asks the students to discuss their answers and solve problems in multiple ways. We will incorporate more project based learning and we will continue to align our science and social studies programs with the Common Core Standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any programs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students at P.S. 326, including ELLs, have equal access to all programs. Participation in AIS and Extended Day is based on the needs of the students, regardless of ELL status. ELLs are invited to attend our Title III Saturday Academy. 2018-19 CEP 48  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELLs include: Wilson Fundations, Phonemic Awareness Program, Reading Recovery, alternate text sets, books on tape, puzzles, picture dictionaries. Technology includes software programs that build academic vocabulary and comprehension, i.e., RAZ Kids and Starfall. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through bilingual dictionaries, bilingual staff and NYC DoE translation services. In addition, students are partnered with other students who speak their language and provided with picture dictionaries so they can communicate their needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels as per CR-Part 154. Scaffolding is provided and our ELL instruction compliments the content learning objectives that are being taught in the child's classroom. All teachers, including our ELL teacher use the Common core standards to plan instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials to support ELLs include: Wilson Fundations, Phonemic Awareness Program, Reading Recovery, alternate text sets, books on tape, puzzles, picture dictionaries. Technology includes software programs that build academic vocabulary and comprehension, i.e., RAZ Kids and Starfall. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly admitted families, including ELLs, are invited to attend an Open House the spring prior to admission. Our Principal, teachers, Parent Coordinator and translators are available to meet and greet and provide information about school and community programs. During the school year, our bilingual guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator and ELL teacher invite newly enrolled students and their families to tour the school and answer any questions ELL families have prior to the student attending classes. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language electives are offered to any student at PS 326. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 326 does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is coordinated by our professional development team which meets regularly to collaborate on effective professional development planning for teachers. In order to meet the needs of our ELLs, we will continue to provide 2018-19 CEP 49  professional development for ALL staff members on planning thematic units of study which are Common Core aligned and using the workshop model of instruction. PS 326 staff development at the beginning of the school year will continue to focus on designing a workshop model classroom and differentiating instruction. Our work continues in this area as we move through the school year and form small groups of students with similar needs. Our data inquiry team has analyzed our data and has identified students speaking abilities as a particular area of need for all students. On Election day, we will provide all teachers with professional development on improving students' expressive language skills. The principal has met with all our ELL providers and set professional learning goals for all students involved in ELL programs. On-going professional development will be provided and benchmarks will be monitored in January and April. Our onsite coach will also continue to push into classrooms to provide feedback, model lessons and offer alternate methodology when necessary. This coach supports our staff in assisting our ELL students and teachers as they transition from one grade level to another. Teachers of ELLs are expected to participate in all professional development provided to all staff members. Individualized professional development of ELL teachers will be based on student data and progress in reading, writing, listening and speaking as well as content area instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Supports are provided to all ELL students as they transition to new schools for third grade. We communicate with the new schools and provide the students portfolio to the new classroom teacher. We invite the students and their families to tour the new schools and provide them with key personnel at the new site that is bilingual or can put the family in touch with other families at their school that speak the same language. Our teachers receive training in ESL methodologies from our ESL teacher and our ELL network support specialist in order to meet the 15% of the total hours of ELL training for all staff. ELL teachers participate in professional development workshops on Mondays throughout the year in our district and city to meet the requirement of 50% of their total hours. These records of professional development trainings are kept on file at our school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides annual individual meetings with parents at registration and at the parent orientation. We also meet with our ELL parents on Tuesday afternoons during our parent engagement period. Parents receive individualized progress reports four times per year and follow up meetings with individual parents are scheduled by appointment. Student progress is monitored on a daily basis and a lending parent resource library is available to families to work with their children at home. ELL families are also invited to participate in our Saturday Academy for students and their parents. All meetings include the use of our bilingual on site staff members or over the phone translation services if necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P.S 326 we are especially committed to involving parents of ELLs in their children's learning and school in order to ensure our students academic and social success. Our Parent Coordinator provides a parent survey requesting the parents record their needs or ideas for additional support. Based on results of these surveys our parent outreach includes: on-going orientation sessions for parents of newly enrolled ELL students on the state standards, school expectations and the curriculum assisted by bilingual and ELL staff members. School related information and letters are sent home translated in the families' native language. We provide volunteer translators to assist in communicating at school meetings and parent workshops whenever available. ELL students and their families are invited to attend our Title III Saturday Academy. This literacy program is designed to instruct ELLs in foundation and basic skills in both reading and math. Parents are also invited to our read aloud nights and program to support family literacy. 2018-19 CEP 50  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Colleen Ducey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 326 School DBN: 22K326 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Colleen M. Ducey Title Principal Melissa B. Fontanelli Assistant Principal Melida Foster Parent Coordinator Galina Aleksandrovich ENL/Bilingual Teacher Leroy Anderson Parent Emma Nagel Jen DeLuca Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Sarah Corvoisier School Counselor Julia Bove Cheryl Watson Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Katherine Allison Other Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 9/18/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 22K326 School Name: PS 326 Superintendent: Julia Bove The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Melida Foster Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We conducted our assessment of written translation and oral interpretation through our annual needs assessment survey and through school leadership team surveys and informal interviews of parents and school staff. We also examined Home Language Surveys and blue cards in which parents indicated their preferred language of communication. We entered this information on ATS and are able to generate reports instantly and know who needs translated documents and in which preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 54  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French Haitian Creole English Spanish Urdu 4 1 10 152 11 3 2.2 0.55 5.49 83.52 6.04 1.65 4 0 12 150 11 4 2.2 0 6.59 82.42 6.04 2.2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School Handbook, Welcome Letter to parents September Invitation to Meet the teacher night September Parent Teacher Conference letters and Report Cards November Holdover letters January Title III Saturday invitations for students and families February Family Progress Reports October and January How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We already have the school handbook and Welcome letter to parents in three languages: English, Spanish and Haitian Creole. We have recently hired a teacher that is fluent in Arabic. She will provide translation of our school documents as the year progresses. We will send this letter to the DOE interpretation unit for revisions. Centrally provided Centrally provided We already have these letters in translated copies and we will update them with new dates. We have sent these progress reports out for translation in Spanish and Haitian Creole. We will send a request to the DOE's interpretation unit for revisions if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 55  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide IEP meetings Ongoing Parent Teacher Conferences November and March Holdover meetings January Family workshops Tuesday Afternoons interpretation service(s)? We have four people on staff that are bilingual. When parents come for IEP meetings, we make sure that we have one of these staff members present. In the cases where we don't have a bilingual staff member available, we will call the translation and interpretation unit and use their services over the phone. We will make appointments with families that need a bilingual staff member present at their meetings with their child's teacher. Parents may also bring an adult friend/companion or relative to this meeting. We will make appointments with families on Tuesday afternoons and provide in house bilingual staff members or over the phone services from the translation and interpretation unit if the family does not bring an interpreter with them. We will have bilingual staff members at all family workshops and encourage families to bring adult relatives who can translate for them so they can participate. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. PS 326 employs staff members that are bilingual in Spanish, Haitian Creole, Arabic and Russian. In the event of an emergency, we will reach out to families by phone. We also have the ability to text families and we can use Google Translate to send an emergency message if needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure2018-19 CEP 56  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members have access to the language access kit and we provide training at the September Faculty Conference on the DOE's requirements for providing translation services to families. Teachers are given a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 in their school handbook also given to them at the September Faculty Conference. The DOE's translation and interpretation phone number is posted in the main office, the parent coordinator's office and the administrator's offices if needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will employ the assistance of bilingual staff members to orally translate and to provide written notices in a families preferred language. In the event that we do not have a translator available we will call the DOE's translation unit and ask for their assistance or place a cover letter over the parents' document indicating how a parent can get free translation or interpretation of the document. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from families will be gathered formally on the Learning Environment Survey and our Parent School Leadership Team Survey. We will also gather feedback informally through family conversations and interactions at all parent meetings. 2018-19 CEP 57 
