2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 21K348 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL OF SPORTS MANAGEMENT Principal: DEREK CRADLE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The High School of Sports Management 332100011348332100011348 9-12 School Number (DBN): 21k348 2630 Benson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11214 718-333-7650 Phone Number: 718-333-7675 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Derek Cradle dcradle@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 21 Derek Cradle Michael Myers Peter Memoli TheraLewis Elisabeth Filsaime TreseanPatterson Ana Romero Reverend Branch District Information Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 SHORE BOULEVARD BROOKLYN, NY 11235. Phone: 718-368-8515 Superintendent’s Office Address: Brooklyn, NY 11236 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-368-8515 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: South Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Mauricierede Govia Executive Director: 415 89th Street MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4862 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Derek Cradle Michael Myers Peter Memoli Elisabeth Filsaime TreseanPatterson Ana Romero *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Reverend Branch-non voting CBO Representative, if applicable Michel Brown Dr. TheraLewis Hank Johnson Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Chelsea Monroe AmanyHelal Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? This school’s educational philosophy advances and nurtures the total student and supports all stakeholders including teachers, parents, and community partners in establishing a loving, caring and rigorous learning environment. The academic environment, is fashioned to educate students in the necessities of life, will allow them to mature into productive citizens and expose them to educative processes, which prepares them to exceed the requirements of the New York State Regents and the Career and Technology Standards, and to graduate with honors. 2018-19 CEP 9  With that said, our school's focus and “theory of action” has been focused on the improvement on the instructional practice and protocols of the teacher. We believe, “When teachers are bettered in their practice, our students will be bettered in their performance.” Our focus this year has been to equip our teachers with the tools to support the students that are drawn to our school. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The High School of Sports Management, first and foremost, is an academic institution, where students are exposed daily to intellectual rigor and disciplined social interactions. For many students, this is their first experience with an environment that assumes their capacity for success. Students are positively reinforced and able to see themselves as worthy of, capable of and entitled to taking a vested interest in their future. Learned helplessness and disenfranchisement is obliterated by an atmosphere of order, civility, a sense of purpose, and juxtaposed with rules referred to as “non-negotiable”. To prepare students to meet these expectations and core beliefs, assessments based on the “non-negotiable” are spearheaded making sure those teachers, parents, and most importantly students understand what the results mean and what areas of weakness must be an on-going focus. The core beliefs of the school include: ● Involving the students in activities that allow them time to pursue personal interests and goals; ● Involving parents fully in the life of the school; ● Providing a school environment that is caring and that promotes personal relationships with loving adults who have high expectations for students; ● Engaging students in community service and internships; ● Couching education in a learning system that encourages self-reflection, advances notions of social and personal transformation and learning beyond the classroom; ● Ensuring that stakeholders have full ownership of the governance process; ● Supporting and promoting the cultures of the students; ● Providing instruction to accommodate the student’s different learning styles. Given the nature of the students that are attracted to and enrolled in The High School of Sports Management, it is important that our teaching staff is attuned to the needs of our students if they are going to succeed both academically and socially. In order to improve the outcomes of our students, it is essential that our teachers modify their instructional practice to meet the needs of our students. The priority is about the development of our human capital, “the teacher.” We have taken a three-tiered approach using the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching. The first aspect of this approach is to have our teachers (1) identify their current level of effectiveness. The ability to have a teacher to self-reflect upon their daily practice using a research-based rubric “Danielson Framework” give our 2018-19 CEP 10  administrative team an opportunity to create a professional development plan that is aligned to the needs of the teachers pedagogical abilities. Often times, particularly at the high school level, our teachers do not reflect on their classroom practice. In this grant, our teachers will be asked to reflect to ways to reflect upon their practice with a “Peer Partner” once a day. Teachers will be provided an opportunity to talk with their colleagues about the practice of “teaching.” As a result of the forever-changing expectations implemented by the New York City Department of Education to insure student academic success, our teachers must align their practice to the academic needs and abilities of their students. Therefore, the teachers at The High School of Sports Management must reflect upon their practice within their Professional Pedagogical Partners (3P’s). However, reflection without proper and scripted (2) professional development sessions is a waste of a teacher’s time. The goal of teacher effectiveness requires our human capital (teachers) exposure and practice using new skills to engage and support our students. Many of our teachers use practices that are not aligned because the focus has be directed towards completing a curriculum. Our goal is to provide teaching opportunities for our instructional staff The goal is to provide our staff with opportunities to try research based instructional practices delivered by trained academic coaches. at the high school level, many of our teachers have entered this teaching profession with one modality of instructional delivery. Often times, it is usually the way they learned when they were in school. Given the fact that many of our students learn in multiple modalities requires that our teachers stretch their skills to meet their students optimal learning capacities. These new processes will benefit not only our general education students, but it will have significant improvements with our students with learning disabilities. Lastly, the third tier of our approach for teacher effectiveness is practice and reflection of newly acquired skills monitored by a professional Learning partners. Teachers need time to talk and meet with their colleagues to norm their teaching practices and expectations. Teachers will make use of video-taping and other technological practices to advance their delivery of instruction. At the administrative level, we will continually monitor and provide actionable and timely feedback to support the growth of our teacher . The High School of Sports Management, a school of dreams, a school of aspirations, a school of inspirations, a school of imagination, a school of expectation, and most importantly, a school of excellence. We provide programs that meet the needs of our students, enabling them to develop their potential, preparing them to excel in a technological changing society, and encouraging them to become lifelong learners. The High School of Sports Management has various systems to ensure that such high–level work is evident both vertically and horizontally through the various teacher teams. These systems support teachers in the design and implementation of their curriculum; such systems also ensure the cross-collaboration both vertically and horizontally. In addition, we will engage in learning and implementing the strong pedagogical practices around student feedback. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As of 2018, The High School of sports Management ENL population has grown from approximately 10 students to almost 30. Our newest students are limited in their language both native and English. 2018-19 CEP 11  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The area of the Framework for Great Schools that is most celebrated and demonstrated by our School Quality Review is our Supportive School Environment. It is far from perfect, but we have been able to demonstrate both academic and behavioral growth with our students with our advisory program and our family style behavioral approach to corrective action. In addition, we have shown great success in the development of our professional development in PLC--cycles of learning in which teachers can identify assessment targets early in the unit an plan out a strategy for the multiple learners. The area of our focus this year that has been identified in our 2016 Principal's Performance Review and The School Quality Review is the development of Rigorous Instruction. The implementation of the appropriate and best fit instructional strategies that support cognitive engagement with the content is emerging, but not fully developed across all classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K348 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 242 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 5 School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 75.6% % Reduced Lunch 11.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.5% 28.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.71 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 41% 59.3% 1.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 83 73 1 76.0% 3.7% 20.2% 47.5% 6.6% 4.5% 4 6% 7 N/A N/A 80% 59% 82.1% 7% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Percentile Ranking (FSC Wide) 21K348 Performance Data: The school's strength is Mathematics in 2018 it ranked by Percentile-51%-75% in the Field Support Area. HSSM is one of the highest performing high schools in mathematics. On the opposite side of the spectrum, ELA, Science, and History are in the lowest 25% in the Field Support Area. The priority need is engaging, rigorous, and standard based instruction in ELA, Science, and History. Using formative and summative assessments during Marking Period Cycles that indicate readiness of 80% of all learners in ELA, Science, and History will ensure that students exceed the 65 passing score on all regents exams administered. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the creation of engaging, and rigorous curricula, there will be a 5% increase of students passing ELA Regents. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Frequent cycles of observations and 100% teachers August 2018 to June 2019 Principal professional development on specific Danielson domains, data analysis and designing assessment ● Marking Period data analysis and strategy session during Monday PD to review effectiveness of instructional strategies and action plans for targeted students 100% teachers June 2018-to June 2019 Assistant Principal Coach Departmental Leads Individual teachers Departmental Leads Individual teachers ● Lesson Plan Study. ● Review of all high-stake assessments during common planning meetings and norming sessions of all assessments prior to delivery. 100% teachers September 2018-to-June 2019 Principal/Asst. Principal ● Instructional Rounds to level the delivery of instruction by each of the members within a department and grade level team. 100% teachers Departmental Leads October 2018- to June 2019 Departmental Leads and Individual Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-19 school year, we will engage parents as partners with a continuation of our work from the previous year:  Monthly Parent and Principal chats -alternating early morning coffee or evening snack and chat sessions.  Monthly student celebrations --welcome back BBQ, New comers family meeting, Senior Convocation, Fun and Fitness Sessions, etc.  Tuesday phone check-in  Monthly PA meetings with targeted focus  Advisory parent letters and phone calls. 2018-19 CEP 15   SLT-CSA annual conference (November2018) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this goal, teachers must have sufficient time to meet with one another to design unit/lesson plans that meet the expectations of effective implementation of rigorous instruction. The school-wide program will include an additional preparation period on Monday, This additional period of common-planning time will result in greater departmental and grade level alignment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase of students passing the ELA Regents/mock regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administration will complete mid-year conferences with individual action plans that identify teachers practices showing strengths and weaknesses in Domains 1 and 3 Planning and Questioning". Student work products and classroom observations will be the indicators used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a result of the school-wide study of the Great Schools Framework, the element of supportive Environment is inclusive of our school-wide advisory program. The strength to our school is the tone and culture. Every student from grades 9-12 are connected to a teacher by way of advisory. All students follow a rigid academic and behavioral program that has at its focus the element of chronic absenteeism and college, career, and civic readiness. In 2017, 174 students were absent 10% or more of the enrolled school days-52% of our students were absent last year. Students are tested both in academic subjects and class activities that identify grit, stamina, and self-discipline. During the course of the year, we see some students begin to take ownership of their learning and academic expectations and set SMART goals that they can monitor from semester-to-semester. Our school culture, must be one such that, students are excited to learn and actively engage in classrooms that are welcoming, safe, and orderly. Student-centered learning environments develop students who push and support each other, creating a collaborative and generous atmosphere in the classroom. The classroom must support the social and emotional growth of all students. The identified needs are: 1. To reduce the number of in-class incidents, teachers need professional training in the Restorative Circle methodology for behavior management. 2. Active Student Government in which more students will have a voice in school policies and practices. 3. School-wide behavioral plan that will address accepted classroom practices for all students in our school. 4. More opportunities for students to showcase their academic learning to families and communities. (November, February, and May) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a school community we will reduce the chronic absent rate to 40% by enacting a systematic approach each marking period by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monitor, implement and revise as necessary the HSSM school-wide behavioral plan that is adopted and followed by all teachers in each classroom across the school. Grades 9-12 August 2018 to June 2019 School Leadership Team Review practices and policies of our active student-government and leadership class that encourage targeted students to come to school. 9-12 Greater use and training for the parents in our school-website and technological features. Encouraging families to use school based technology to stay connected to school expectations and events. 9-12 Building wide collaboration in the Arts, Music and sports. The LEC-PLC will schedule collaborative events in these areas so that all students on the campus can participate in activities that may have not be available in the past. (LEC Student Advisory Council) 9-12 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 to June 2019 August 2018 to June 2019 Departmental Leads English and History teachers Administration All instructional staff Guidance Parent Coordinator Community Associate Principals August 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselor How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. HSSM will engage parents/families in multiple ways during the school year: September-October: Advisor phone calls, CAAAS text alerts, guidance interventions, and other technology that oureachs families. HSSM Administration, Lead Teachers, and Parent Coordinator are key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight. November-January: Google Classroom, I/O Education, Tailored Grade Team Meetings for Parents, and Student Facilitated Workshops. HSSM Administration, Lead Teachers, and Parent Coordinator are key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 18  January-March: Mid Year check in with Advisors, Guidance, and Administration. HSSM Administration, Guidance CounselorsLead Teachers, and College Access for 4 All Lead Teachers are key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight. March-May: Parent Workshops, Advisor conferences, and Summer Enrichment Opportunities. HSSM Administration, Lead Teachers, and Parent Coordinator are key personnel responsible for the implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal will come from per-session dollars for planning and development. In addition, incentive programs will reward those students who make significant changes towards positive behaviors and academic performance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitoring this process will happen by investigating detention, suspension, and all class-removal data during each of the marking periods. During our Friday Kid Talk sessions and in advisory classes, we will engage students in the correct habits of mind to become more successful in classes. By February 2019, chronic absences will be reduced to 20% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. At every parent meeting, every staff member will ensure that all parents are signed up on PupilPath. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a result of our School Quality Review, the Principal's Performance Review and conversations with our teachers, we must develop a more strategic for of teacher and inquiry team structure. To date, as a small school, we do not have many teams; however, each of our two teams are quite demanding in studying the behaviors and academic performance of our students. We must have a more streamline approach to our inquiry process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grade teams will engage in inquiry cycles focused on personalized instruction which will result in a 5% increase of students passing Math Regents. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly Lesson Plan Study within each department--disciplined literacy Attendance Improvement Establish school improvement survey in December 2018 that will be monitored through-out the year (February and May). Greater alignment and monitoring towards instructional standards that show mastery 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SWD and ENL September 2018-May 2019 Over-aged and Under-credited September 2018-May 2019 All Students December 2018-May 2019 All students September 2018-May 2019 Instructional Leads All instructional staff Instructional Leads Principal, AP, and instructional leads How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. See above Strategic Summer 2018 planning with the PA executive board to identify programs and needed activities for parents that are celebratory, informational, and supportive of their children. The team will use surveys and our collegiate and professional partnerships to sponsor meetings that will support positive behaviors (NYC-Mental Health), academic development (SAT prep) that will allow our students a more direct pathway towards graduation and meeting the career and college readiness index. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The support in this area will be per-session funds for additional meeting time for specific teams when they are grading MOCK, assessments, MOSL, and lesson study. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 21  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams will be able to reflect upon their progress to achieve the goal(s). The process will be refined as new action plans are created between marking periods to measure success. Student performance in classes as a result of teacher collaboration on assessments and lesson plans can be monitored through class observations. Teachers should have greater success in Danielson Framework in domain 3b, 3c, and 3d. By February 5% of the targeted students should have met the department goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The monitoring guide will be the Advance rating after each observation during the course of the year. In addition, teacher work products and student performance in summative assessment products. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strengths: 1. Passion for the children. We build relationships with students. (Supportive Environment) 2. Teachers look to work together. Our teachers look to one another for support and ideas. 3. We offer rigorous courses in AP Computer Science, Chemistry, and AP Calculus The priority needs: 1. Instructional adjustments and personalization of instruction. One size does not fit all-each student must receive instruction specific to their ability to achieve. 2. Safe environment-The tone and culture must be created and sustained throughout the school year. 3. Parental Involvement-lack of it and creating the multiple ways for families to be tied to the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, professional development based on continuous cycles of teacher observations and feedback, will result in a 5% increase of students accumulating sufficient credits necessary for graduation. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Formation of the Principal's Instructional Cabinet that meets 2 times/month to discuss the direction and goals of the core subjects. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018 June 2019 Instructional Leads Participate in Leadership training sessions with the BFSC and the ASCD conference in Spring 2019 January 2018 May 2019 Train Leads to facilitate small school teams Provide professional reading three times a semester to discuss with staff and leads in the practice of student feedback and assessment development. October 2018 September 2018 June 2019 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Inquiry Team Leaders Principal and Principal Intern Leads and All instructional staff Instructional Lead team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. HSSM-PA and school website are the first point of contact for our families. At the beginning of each year, all of our Advisors will continue to send welcome letters home to families and phone call home to invite families into the school. They will discuss their role as an Advisor, provide guidance on their child's current status, and invite them to the dates for monthly PA meetings. Heavy emphasis for incoming and graduating students will happen at the first quarter of the PA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CF4, At the end of each marking period Title I and Tax-levy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant X X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of each marking period, we will measure the accomplishments of the of the lead initiatives such as credit accumulation within the core subjects and common assessment (Regents). By February 2019 70 % of students will earn 5 or more credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credits earned at the end of the semester. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The data shows that less that 20% of our current parents have logged onto our official gradebook site to engage with their child’s teachers both academically and behaviorally. The disconnect with parents and the school is evident in our Parent Association participation less than 10% that are in attendance at meetings. We want to develop our school that has parents as partners which is demonstrated in their participation act school events and meetings. Our school has to re-create a welcoming and supportive environment for families and take advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school and home. As a staff, we must welcome values, and incorporate families and the larger community into inclusive schools and classrooms. Our schools have a commitment to build stronger partnerships with business and community-based organizations that enrich the school and the entire school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will increase family and community involvement by 50% by designing engaging workshops, student celebrations, and alternative engagement opportunities such as Facebook Live, Google Hangouts, and Zoom conferencing. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent training in technology to support usage of online grading notebook PupilPath and study skills Parent 9-12 August 2018-to-June 2019 Student centered-activities that require parent input across all content disciplines. Parent 9-12 August 2018-to-June 2019 ● ELA study book study-showcase for parents-Fall 2018 ● Math/Science Fair showcase to include parents as judges and/participants ● Oratory contest-Spring 2018 Parent Coordinator Computer Tech Community Associate Departmental Leads Instructional Staff Departmental Leads Instructional Staff Bring your Parent to school Event-parents will be able to sit in on classes during the course of the school day to see the quality of instruction and engage with teachers about the class expectations. Parent 9-12 August 2018-to-June 2019 Departmental Leads Instructional Staff Parent support to up-grade their professional skills in technology, job-readiness, etc. Parent 9-12 November 2018-2019 Administration and Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brooklyn cyclones Leverage Agency, INC. Long Island University 2018-19 CEP 27  College Spring That Suits You One Goal Elevate McGraw Hill Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session funds will be available to support our parents on two PA meeting dates technology support so that they can log onto their child’s PupilPath account. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To support parent engagement goal of an increase of 50%, we will use our PD parent time to plan student-centered activities in which we will increase our parent participation by 25% in these events by February 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PupilPath Anecdotals, Student programs-Award Ceremony,Open House, Curriculum Night, Thanksgiving Share, etc. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small-group instruction During the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) High school/College Writing course-Literacy and writing across the content areas. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below grade reading score level-1/2. Summer ELA assessment score. English Regents score below 65. Below grade math score level-1/2. Algebra Regents score below 65. Below grade reading level-1/2. Living Environment score below 65. Social Studies Below grade reading level-1/2. History Regents score below 65. SAT foundations math course. Small-group instruction Summer math assessment score. CC-Algebra skills course. During the school day and/or Saturday school program. Incoming students will receive and additional supportive class-Literacy of Science. Upper-class students can receive a Living Environment Prep class or Saturday school prep class History Regents preparatory course. Small-group instruction During the school Day. After-school preparation. Small-group instruction and tutoring After-school and/or Saturday school 2018-19 CEP 29  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance below 80%. 2-5 Principal/Supt. Suspensions. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of September 2018, 25 students are identified as STH. However, 17 families are classified as Doubled-up (non-shelter). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The Pupil support team has planned early intervention actions for both the student and families starting with: (1) End-of-Year academic (Summer School) and/or Summer Youth work support (2) Uniform Distribution (3) Extra-curricula and/or academic support after-school (AIS) or PSAL (4) College Awareness through Advisory (5) One-to-One counseling session with GC (6) Parent Meetings that focus on Parent Job skills Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 31  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/A 2018-19 CEP 32  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. High School of Sports Management volunteers to host teaching fellows during the Spring and Summer sessions. Teachers new to the department are able to master key instructional practices that support student development. Under this process we have been able to retain 2-3 fellows for the upcoming school year. Inasmuch, each new teacher participates in our New Teacher workshop series. Each month we meet to discuss any issue, problems, and highlights that make the work seamless and manageable. In addition, each teacher is provided with a departmental/grade level buddy. We continue to work with the East Coast Conference of Universities and Delaware State University as we implement our own Sports Management curriculum. College students come to our school and perform student-teaching hours in Sports Management. In addition, we have one teacher being trained in ENL instruction. As a small school, our teaching staff must be proficient in providing the appropriate services for ENL’s and Students with Disabilities (SWD). Currently, our Special Education Coordinator/teacher serves as a co-teacher for six of our ICT classes. This team provides training for staff in using SESIS and CAP. Also, they are instrumental in IEP management between the SAT team members. The goal is to insure all SWD receive their mandated services. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The teachers and support staff are being trained to implement the CCLS using the Danielson Framework to insure Teacher Effectiveness. We have hired a consultant LINC to work with a school transformation team to increase their instructional capacity serve all of our students to meet academic expectations to become more college and career ready. In addition, we have Field Support Center Content Specialist that works with teachers to provide one-to-one support in content. Lastly, teachers are expected to inter-visit with their colleagues and seek out professional development opportunities to meet their instructional needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 33  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision-making process used by our teachers to identify the assessment measures and the professional development needed to improve instruction based upon those assessment measures are the criteria elements needed that the majority of the teachers do not poses such that they cannot turnkey the skills to the department. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 34 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) 160,566 0 0 12,366 1,706,683 Column A Verify with an (X) X x Column B Section Reference(s) Sec. 5 Sec. 5 Sec. 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 35   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The High School of Sports Management, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School of Sports Management will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 37  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 38  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School of Sports Management , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP 39  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 41  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 42  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 43  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 44  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After school and Saturday Small Group Instruction (SGI) focused on foundational ELA and Math Standards. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers will work FSC throughout the school year attending PD's. Title III program teachers will turnkey information to the other staff members. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Parent Coordinator and Title III Program staff will create engaging family programs to inform parents and families. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8500  Per session 2018-19 CEP 45  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $1500 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1500 $2500 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name The High School of Sports Management Borough Brooklyn School Number 348 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robin Pitts Coach Krishna Saha ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Yvette Martinez Teacher/Subject Area Michel Brown Related-Service Provider Deanna Pandolphni Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Derek Cradle Coach type here School Counselor Janu Williams Parent Jessy Currie Parent Coordinator Michelle Henley Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 370 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.57%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At The HS of Sports Management, we use the 8 th grade assessment scores as a baseline, reading, writing, speaking, and listening assessment rubrics for ENL, math assessment, and NYS performance assessment in both math and ELA at the HS of Sport Management. The data will confirm or disapprove our assumption on a student's ability to meet the 9 th grade expectations. Moreover, all subject area teachers together with ENL teacher develop an instructional plan to support literacy in their classes. The ENL teacher pushes into the ELA and Global History classes for grade 9. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ninth grade inquiry team which includes the ENL teacher to analyze the data and create the structures to support teachers and students. 2018-19 CEP 48  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Initially, we use the NYC baseline assessments and end-of-marking period assessments to identify the learning gaps and success of our ENL students. Teachers make adjustments to curriculum based upon assessments and daily checks for understanding. Then we evaluate our ENL success using the scores of our state assessments and college entrance. Our ENL students graduate on time and enter college at the 2 and 4 year levels as a rule. Once they are able to demonstrate proficiency in grades 9 and 10, they are able to sustain themselves without the support of ENL program to meet the graduation criteria. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The teachers within the departments analyze the data to make recommendations for both curriculum and pedagogical strategies. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The revelation is the level of comprehension of what our ELL students need to meet the requirements to study in the 9 th grade. We supported them in a double period English Language Arts and mathematics in addition to a literacy skills class. Regents data this year as our ENL students have grown 100% required addition support for basic literacy skills for students who are new arrival students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have partnered with International HS to support our students and staff with the develop of pedagogical practices that support language learners through PD and shadowing teachers within their school. Our ENL students take a supportive course in literacy period 9 and have a period/ week in advisory to support a shared experience in new language acquisition. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding program, the students are grouped according to homogeneous model, so instruction is delivered to students of the same level of proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 CEP 49  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL and ELA instructional minutes delivered in each program model according to CR Part 154-2 Units of Study and Staffing Requirements. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To address the needs of academic language development and content, our Inquiry Teams consistently provide all teachers with direction as they prepare and present lessons. In addition, ongoing teacher professional development is encouraged through participation in our School-wide conferences and Common Planning Time. ENL teacher and all subject area teachers are encouraged not only to teach our ENL vocabulary but also concepts that are relevant to a students' success in the academic arena. For example, a considerable amount of classroom time is devoted to the development of writing skills which indicate that students understand academic vocabulary and use compare and contrast maps and other mapping, graphing and K-W-L charts among others. Students are also taken to a computer lab on a regular basis to get instruction using various computer app's that include language development and pictures. Teachers implement differentiated instruction and scaffolding is employed in all subject areas. Our ENL teacher uses various effective strategies to bring ENL students to meet Common Core Learning Standards such as Close Reading Strategy, Question Formulation Techniques, The 4C's Strategy and many others. New arrival students are provided with Ipads so that they are able to translate immediately in all classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: At the time of their arrival, the ENL teacher provides each family with the mandated questionnaire and language testing. As a result of their score, ENL classification is determined and a program with the required CORE and ENL classes are provided. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our teachers differentiate instruction for newcomers using visuals, explaining key vocabulary, demonstrating video, face-to-face instruction, applying a student's home language, body language, grouping, assessment, and peer-evaluation and support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? See answers in Q. 3. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have a significant number of bilingual titles which are available for students in our school library. Software has also been purchased for their use in ongoing language acquisition and Achieve 3000. Along with the above mentioned instructional materials, we also provide the students with dictionaries, magazines, games and newspapers in the classroom in order to promote a richer academic environment. The ENL teacher uses lots of the traditional means of language acquisition.. Our students present their understanding in both oral and written format. 2018-19 CEP 50  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. See answer in Q. 3 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will plan to continue with the following: Pull-Out Services. Push-In Services during CORE Instruction. Effective Instructional Teaching Strategies for LTE's (Question Formulation Techniques- QFT, Sketch to Stretch, and Concept Mapping. Use of Ipads for Translation Professional Development for All Teachers, specifically for Identified ELLs. Computer-based learning programs such as iLearnNYC and Castle Learning to extend learning from the class to home. Portfolios of learning to help ENL students to self-assess and monitor progress. After-school/Saturday tutoring, specifically for ENL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At The HS of Sports Management, we have implemented a meet and greet for all foreign students particularly those students who originate for Yeman, Bangladesh, Mexico, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Core materials that we can obtain in a different language we purchase such as Algebra and math textbooks We use translator app for all ENL students. See answers in question 9. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Through use of home language support during ENL instruction and Spanish language classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All students have access to all school-wide programs and activities. Through our Advisory Program, each one is encouraged to participate in athletics and clubs. Many of our ELLs are members of the Boys or Girls Varsity Soccer, Cricket, and Volleyball Teams. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? See answers to q. 9 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school counselor and parent coordinator organize school journey to get our new ENL students familiar with our HSSM and its policies. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 CEP 51  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teacher will support our teachers with two PD workshops during the course of the school year. She will support her colleagues with an overview of 2-4 literacy strategies that can be implemented to support teaching and learning for Enl students. We also work with International HS to support teachers as they are able to shadow the ENL teacher at that school. The ENL teacher supports the school with turnkey training once they return from the monthly ENL PD sessions hosted by the BSFS office. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: As previously indicated, professional development for our ENL teacher and subject area teachers in HSSM is ongoing. As a result of our knowledge of the Federal Consent Decree, intensive Professional Development has been ongoing since September 2004 and will continue. Presentation to the faculty regarding the implementation of our Anti-Discrimination/Anti-Harrassment policy. UDL/Respect for All Training provided to entire staff. Presentation to faculty regarding the use of Language Line to provide instant translation to students and parents as they interact with staff. Training for guidance counselors and related support services staff on the testing and placement of our ELLs. Faculty conference-Training for all teachers-ELL strategies for Subject Area Instruction. Inquiry Book Study Teaching Reading to ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL parents are invited to school to discuss language proficiency results with ENL teacher, all subject area teachers and a guidance counelor. Interpretation and translation are provided. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: To meet the needs of our ENL parents, we have all notices printed in the home language, in addition, our ENL teacher personally calls each family to invite them to attend school meetings and functions. 2018-19 CEP 52  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All ELLs in our school receive additional support from their ESL teacher during their lunch period if they need it. 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robin Pitts, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HSSM School DBN: 21K348 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robin Pitts Title Principal Derek Cradle Assistant Principal Michelle Henley Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Margaret Quinn Parent Ivette Pazmino-Martinez Teacher/Subject Area Michel Brown Teacher/Subject Area Krishna Saha Coach Coach Janu Williams School Counselor Michael Prayor Richard Grzelewski Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 21k348 School Name: The HS of Sports Management Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. Mila Janu Derek Gina Bary Williams Cradle Alysa Former ENL Teacher Yes Guidance Counselor No AP ENL Teacher No No Yes Yes yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies that The High School of Sports Management uses to access parent language preferences for communication are the following: a: ATS Reports b: Student Emergency Cards c: Parent Conferences d: Parent town Hall meetings and IEP/grade meeting e: In-house-Student surveys f: Advisory Conferences 2018-19 CEP 56  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral The preferred languages for the families at The High School of Sports Management for the 2016-17 school year are the following: a: Spanish b: Russian c: Urdu d: Cantonese/ Madarian e: Haitian/Creole f. English g. Arabic h. Albanian i. Bambara j. French k. Turkish l. Ukrainian m. Uzbek n. chinese -any o. Fanti to be determined to be determined to be determined to be determined 67 11 5 0 2 317 7 2 1 1 1 1 3 10 1 27.27 2.7 1.23 0 .49 72.97 1.72 .49 .25 .25 .25 .25 .74 2.46 .25 67 11 7 1 2 295 7 2 1 1 1 1 3 7 1 27.27 2.7 1.72 .25 .49 72.48 1.72 .49 .25 .25 .25 .25 .74 1.72 .25 2018-19 CEP 57 67 317 5 27.27 90.27 1.23 67 295 7 67.27 72.48 1.72 Spanish English Urdu 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Departmental expectations and course descriptions September 2017 Course Syllabii Welcome Letter Advisory Notice Parent Association Notices August 2017 Open School Awards Ceremony Graduation September 2017 November 2017 March 2018 May 2018 February 2017 March 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The on-going) letters are updated and translated using word translation and disseminated to families. Same as above NYCDOE official translated documents Same as above Same as above NYCDOE translation service Summer School 2018 May 2018 Same as above 2018-19 CEP 58  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Family Night-September 2017 Family & Community Partners,Teacher & Student Family BBQ-September 2017 Monthly PTA meeting Parent Teacher Conference-November 2017 Thanksgiving Share Celebration-November 2017 Advisory Meeting-January 2018 Mid-Year Town Hall-February 2018 Student-Led Conferences-March 2018 Awards Celebration-April 2018 NHS- Inductions-May 2018 Graduation-June 2018 Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school interpretation service(s)? September 2017 Use of NYCDOE translation unit for families in Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese. October -November 2017 Same December 2017 January 2018 January 2018 2018-19 CEP 59  Family Night-September 2017 Family & Community Partners,Teacher & Student Family BBQ-September 2017 Monthly PTA meeting Parent Teacher Conference-November 2017 Thanksgiving Share Celebration-November 2017 Advisory Meeting-January 2018 Mid-Year Town Hall-February 2018 Student-Led Conferences-March 2018 Awards Celebration-April 2018 NHS- Inductions-May 2018 Graduation-June 2018 March 2018 September 2017 September 2017 Yes Use of NYCDOE translation unit for families in Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese. October -November 2017 Same December 2017 January 2018 January 2018 March 2018 Graduation NHS-Induction January-June 2018 Yes May 2018 No 2018-19 CEP 60  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will translate using the various adults in the building who speak the given languages of our students. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The faculty and staff at The HS of Sports Management will be provided with this information in their 2017-18 staff manual. This regulation will be re-addressed at our welcome back PD session in September 2017 and February 2018. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) See all above. It is our goal to insure that all families feel welcomed and have 100% access to school functions and programs regardless of their respective language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will monitor our effectiveness of services by the number of parents of various languages who attend school wide events, in addition to those efforts that are provided we will monitor with follow-up conversations. 2018-19 CEP 61 
