2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K349 School Name: I.S. 349 MATH, SCIENCE & TECH. Principal: TIFFANY PENDOLA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information I.S. 349 333200010349 6-8 School Number (DBN): 32K349 35 Starr Street Brooklyn, NY 11221 718-418-6389 718-418-6146 Phone Number: Tiffany Pendola Fax: Email Address: Tpendola@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Center for Supportive Schools Tiffany Pendola Natasha Mir Renee Haynes Angelique Echeverria Renee Haynes Angelique Echeverria N/A District Information Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Sheila S. Gorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11221 sgorski@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Brooklyn - North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 501, Brooklyn, NY 11220 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Tiffany Pendola Renee Haynes Angelique Echeverria Natasha Mir N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) X X X X X X X Dynasty Sheftall Noemi Henriquez MarisolTorres Evelyn Cordero Deborah Roberts-Muller Thomas Napoli Theresa Rodriguez Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The School of Math, Science and Technology, IS 349 is located in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, New York. Since its existence in 2000, IS 349 has developed into a community in which there is collaboration amongst administrators, teachers, students, and parents to provide students with the best educational opportunities to become life-long learners. I.S. 349 has a student population of 326 students spanning grades 6 through 8. The school's demographic population consists of 85.28% Hispanic students, 13.19% Black students, 0.92% White students, and 0.61% Other. The student body includes 19.93% English Language Learners ( ELLs ) and 21.47% are Students with Disabilities ( SWD ). The school is classified as a Title 1 school whereas, 93.1% of students qualify for free lunch. The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 93.31%. At present, the school shares the same building with IS 347 and Achievement First University Prep High School. The schools share the library, cafeteria, schoolyard , dance room, and the gymnasium. The mission of I.S. 349 is to create a culturally responsive environment engrossed around quality education where students are empowered to be critical thinkers who take ownership of their learning. All members of our community (both inside and outside of school) will strive to nurture the excitement of knowledge, build the character of its members, and foster citizenship with our students so that they may emerge as confident, self-reflective learners with the social skills necessary to excel in our dynamic world. The school has a redesigned instructional focus currently being implemented stating that "By June 2019, if all teachers work collaboratively in data-driven inquiry cycles and utilize results from common assessments to create strategic interventions, then all students, including our English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities (SWDs) will demonstrate progress towards Math and ELA proficiency." This focus was devised strategically by key stakeholders based upon an analysis of student achievement data, aligned to District 32's goals and vision, and the school's previous Quality Review (QR) reports. This instructional focus supports the school's belief that students learn best when they are able to discuss and complete rigorous academic tasks on a daily basis. The daily expectations of instruction reflect this instructional focus, as students will have the opportunity to engage in meaningful discussions about important content and will further demonstrate their understanding through rigorous writing tasks. To support the instructional focus, ongoing professional learning sessions are provided to assist each pedagogue in furthering their instructional skills and enable them to implement the instructional focus and improve teaching and learning. Structures and resources are in place to adapt curricula so that all learners have access to rigorous task, with special emphasis on such modifications for ELLs and SWDs. ELL students are provided additional supports in ELA classes through push in teachers who work specifically with ELL students in the classes to provide these entry points. The school has programmed subject area teacher(s) to work directly with special education teacher(s) to implement a content-based curriculum to provide multiple entry points for all learners. Through these and other supports the school strives to engage every student in rigorous learning every day. The element of the Framework of Great Schools in which IS 349 made the most progress over the past year is Rigorous Instruction. During the 2016-17 School Year, IS 349 underwent a Quality Review (Q.R.), resulting in a third consecutive overall Proficient Rating, with all indicators rated Proficient or Well-Developed. Key to this was the continued improvement in Q.R. indicators 1.2, 1.1, and 2.2. This was in large part due to the implementation of professional development strategies by teachers into the classroom and and a shared desire to improve instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  and student learning outcomes amongst the staff. IS 349 continued to improve the following year. In 2017-2018 School Quality Review resulted in a rating of Well -Developed in Q.R. indicators 1.4 and 1.3 due to our ability to maintain a positive culture that supports the instructional goals while also supporting the academic and personal growth of students and adults. We received a Proficient rating for the remaining indicators with regards to the Instructional core, School culture and Systems for Improvement. Another area of progress for the school has experienced growth in the Framework for Great Schools Element of Strong Family-Community Ties by offering parent workshops in collaboration with our Community Based Organization (CBO) partner the Center for Supportive Schools, such as ENL classes for parents, and improved communication with parents through an increase in the number of parents logging into PupilPath to track student academic progress. Outreach efforts were evident during the school's Community Forum, during which over 120 parents participated in the forum discussions to share their input into shaping school initiatives. Community Partnerships: Effective for the 2018-19 school year, IS 349 has been identified as a Renewal School. As part of this process, IS 349 has also been identified as a Community School, and will continue the existing partnership with our lead Community Based Organization (CBO), the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS), to support the school in meeting the needs of students and families to positively impact student achievement. Through this partnership the school is able to sub-contract with Interborough Developmental and Consultation Center to provide a full-time Social Worker to offer mental health services for students and a part-time Family Worker to coordinate additional services for families within the community three days/week. To provide further social-emotional learning opportunities for students, the school will continue to implement the Peer Group Connection (PGC) program, in which 8th grade students are trained as peer leaders to support the transition of 6th grade students into middle school. This initiative has had a positive impact on student attendance, with the average daily attendance of peer leaders improving by 2.3% from the previous school year. Additionally, through the partnership with CSS the school is able to offer STEAM learning opportunities for students by engaging The Salvadori Center to provide a weekly class for all 6th grade students in the Bridges curriculum, during which time students study the bridges of New York City and construct models to understand the engineering principles utilized to construct said skyscrapers. Students were also offered the opportunity to engage in a partnership with Pratt Institute to study GIS mapping, urban planning, and coding. In February 2019, CSS is launching an in-house tutoring program using community school funds for students in each grade to receive afterschool small group instruction by IS 349 teachers to prepare for the NYS ELA and Math exams. Is 349 will support this after school tutoring program that CCS is funding by paying for the supervisors to assist with its implementation. Additionally, through our partnership with CSS, the school has trained Success Mentors to match with chronically absent students in an effort to build a strong connection with one adult in the building and improve student attendance. However, this remains a struggle as the school average daily attendance rate declined to 93.5%. CCS will work close with the attendance support funded by IS 349. Ms. Yessenia Ortega will assist the improvement of attendance by working closely with the CCS. This will include daily parent outreach, creating positive reinforcements for the students, tracking attendance, meeting weekly to discuss trends, etc. Additional Community Partnerships include the following: New York City College of Technology: BRIDGING THE GAP (For students in grades 7 and 8) A collaboration with New York City College of Technology whereas pre-college courses are offered to middle and high school students. Students are exposed to courses such as Robotics, Math and English that promote academic and college readiness. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  Urban Advantage’s Middle School Science Initiative: Urban Advantage is a standards-based partnership program designed to improve students' understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions. It encourages communication with schools and families. This program is a part of Excellent STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) instruction is critical to ensuring that New York City's students are college and career-ready in the 21st century. Riseboro community partnership Afterschool Program: Through the RiseBoro afterschool program, students will be offered a wide range of voluntary afterschool programming to further support their academic success. Students will be offered stand alone afterschool programs on each week day from 3:45 pm to 6:45 pm. These programs will allow students to engage in the development of literacy and math skills through the creation of an engaging curriculum and homework help programs. In addition, the program offers extracurricular clubs ranging from Garage Band to cooking that students can choose from based on their unique interests. Extended Learning Time (ELT): After successfully implementing ELT during the 2017-18 school year, IS 349 will once again provide an additional 225 minutes of mandated instruction each week throughout the school year. The school will implement this program by extending the school day for one hour each day, with students engaging in a nine period day, as opposed to the traditional eight period day. The implementation of this mode will result in students receiving an additional period of instruction each day. The additional instructional period will be programmed by the individual needs of each student, providing either academic intervention services including time designated for iReady instruction, enrichment opportunities such as the Salvadori and Pratt programs and additional arts classes in the following areas: visual arts and dance. With the implementation of this model, students are ensured to have a certified content area teacher providing instruction during each class. Rich Text Editor, 4954 Rich Text Editor, 4954 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K349 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 310 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 28 4 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 94.8% % Reduced Lunch 23.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 87.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A 2 93.2% 2.9% 21.3% 11.0% 0.3% 0.0% 4 20% 9.7 23.4% 25% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed n/a x n/a n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? School Strengths:  The school has developed a CCLS aligned curriculum across all courses through the creation of curriculum maps and unit plans aligning resources with the appropriate grade level standards as evidenced by the school's proficient rating in QR indicator 1.1 on the most recent quality review. Resources utilized to shift to a rigorous CCLS aligned curriculum included the full implementation of the Teachers College Writing Project curricula across ELA classrooms and the full implementation of the Go Math curriculum across Mathematics classrooms resulting in an increase in ELA proficiency from 17% to 27% and Math proficiency from 12% to 23% based on current 2018 state scores.  Our small class sizes assists with the increase of proficiency. This allows for more individualized attention and support for our students, in addition to our AIS services in the form of smal group instruction, I ready pull-out classes, etc.  The school has implemented a strategic assessment plan to develop systems to track student learning, and monitor their progress. In conjunction with additional informal assessment strategies and the implementation of student led conferences in which students set individual goals to track their academic progress, the school scored proficient rating in QR indicator 2.2 on the most recent quality review.  The school has implemented targeted learning supports for students through the use of educational software supports including iReady in both ELA and Math. These resources provide multiple points of entry for students, providing targeted individual learning modules to meet the needs of individual students.  Through regularly scheduled grade and department team meetings, teachers utilize structured protocols to review curriculum maps and unit plans to make modifications to curricula based on an analysis of student 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  learning outcomes. These modifications have provided students with multiple entry points so they are able to access a rigorous CCLS aligned curriculum. One such example is the integration of Engage NY modules into the Go Math curriculum, resulting in increased opportunities for students to participate in rigorous learning activities Priority Need:  The most important need to address is the continued creation of appropriate scaffolds and entry points to ensure that all learners make progress in their ability to comprehend reading passages and complex math word problems. Specifically, the school will target ELLs to provide on-going instruction in vocabulary to build comprehension. This need is based upon the performance of the ELLs students on the NYSED ELA & Math exams, in which ELLs students [insert performance data]. Additionally, students scored [insert performance data] on the NYSESLAT exam. In addition to supporting ELLs, another focus will be to support SWDs in order to meet their needs by incorporating scaffolds and proper modifications into the daily curriculum. We will also support the creation of quality IEPs, provide PL opportunities for teachers to take part in order to better understand how to meet the needs of our SWD students and strengthen the delivery of instruction, the creation of quality IEPs with goals that are aligned to the CCLS and skill based, etc.   The instruction provided will focus on meeting the diverse needs of the student within the class. All students will be challenged and supported, including our general education and advance leaders, through rigorous tasks that include writing throughout content areas. Differentiation of instruction, UDL, and station teaching should be a constant practise within instruction across all contents. Instructional supports may include, but are not limited to the following: IReady, Imagine Learning, Myon, Brain Pop, Ready books for test prep support, etc. IS 349 is in need of strengthening the science curricula and materials for the science department. This year teachers will meet to plan together weekly (after school with the support of AP Vaughn) in order to write curricula aligned to the NYS Science Scope and Sequence for grades 6-8, as well as, receiving new new textbooks that incorporate hand-on activities, CCLS, technology components, etc.  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? The school's instructional focus currently being implemented states that, "By June 2019, if all teachers work collaboratively in data-driven inquiry cycles and utilize results from common assessments to create strategic interventions, then all students, including our English Language Learners (ELLs) and Student with Disabilities (SWD) will demonstrate progress towards Math and ELA proficiency." This focus will lead to the implementation of targeted interventions for all students including English Language Learners (ELLs), students with disabilities and at-risk students. In classrooms, students will participate in the workshop model and engage in daily discussions and writing tasks to support their comprehension of both CCLS skills and content. To ensure that the instructional focus is promoted across classrooms, the staff will engage in professional learning opportunities in cycles of intervention based upon an analysis of student learning outcomes on formative assessments. It will also be based on reviews of observation data gathered from frequent cycles of targeted observations during weekly grade and departmental meetings. Additionally, members of the Instructional Leadership Team will participate in monthly instructional walk-thrus to monitor the implementation of the instructional focus. The school will also continue to participate in the Data-Wise model school program, to further the knowledge of all staff members in conducting structured inquiry work. Lastly, together as a school we will utilize staff, materials and funding to best meet the needs of our students. We have 2 lead teachers; one for ELa and another for Math. In addition, we have a model teacher who assist with setting up classroom intervisitations based on teacher strengthens to support teacher growth. The FSC has also provided support via an ELA person coach who has TC and literacy experiences. She is working with our ELA lead to support teachers based on individual needs in order to strengthen literacy strategies within the ELA classroom. The CBO 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  is working with administration in order to provide after school tutoring support based on data from the NYS ELA and Math Item Analysis report. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? The CCLS-aligned curricula implemented by the school will consist of multiple entry points that incorporated various formats to represent information and enhance student engagement. These multiple entry points will be created for students through modifications made to the curriculum by teacher teams during bi-weekly meetings. Modifications to the curriculum will also include adaptations to include resources that are both personally and culturally relevant to our students. Additionally, students will be provided with various technological resources such as access to computer labs and tablet carts to provide multiple entry points. Students will be programmed to participate on the iReady platform for both ELA and Math to provide targeted learning opportunities. CCLS-aligned curriculum will be respectful towards culture and will include opportunities for students to dive deeper into various cultures including their own. Differentiation of tasks and scaffolds will be supported in order for students to gain a better grasp of the material and tasks within the curriculum. These scaffolds may come in the form of teacher/peer, content, task, and material scaffolding. Differentiation will also meet the needs of visual, auto, kinesthetic, and tactual learners by all members of the learning community taking a learning styles inventory during the commencement of the school year. Teachers will work in departments to review data collected and adjust their practice to meet the students needs. In addition, professional development will be provided for teachers to include Universal Design for Learning elements into their daily practices, modifications based on IEPs , and the incorporation of more station teaching. Questioning will include higher-level questions based on Webb's DOK which with include methods for students to engage in discussion. This will come in the form of turn-and-talks, small groups tasks and discussions debates, etc. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? To support students in developing skills, habits and behaviors to be college and career ready, the school will implement the Peer Group Connection (PGC) program. It is a research-based program which develops 8th grade peer leaders to mentor incoming 6th graders. This program will promote career and college ready behaviors and habits. Additionally, students will be offered courses in Algebra for All, given targeted support periods in both Mathematics and ELA, and also Arts programs. Furthermore, the school will continue the implementation of the Teacher's College (TC) Writing Pathways, Project Based Inquiry Science (PBIS), and Go Math curricula to provide students with the skill set necessary for career and college readiness. Additionally, in collaboration with CSS, students will receive one period a week of the Salvadori program, providing students with an enhanced STEM-based curriculum. Lastly, all students will participate in a technology course, providing them with the skills needed to be Career and College ready. For all of these additional course offerings, the instructional shifts are embedded in the course curriculum. AIS opportunities will support our struggling students in order to gain access into parts of the curricula they they are struggling with. Within the school culture students will engage in rich conversations while citing evidence from texts in order to support their claims. Writing will be embedded across all content areas via high-level rigours tasks with the incorporation of differentiated scaffolds. Students will be provided the opportunity to access a variety of literary texts with proper supports in order for them to gain access to the material. Math curricula will focus deeply on the prioritized standards. Teachers will adjust curricula based on the tracking of common trends from common assessments throughout the school year. Together we will work towards proving 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  students with strategies for their success of fluency and dive deeper into mathematical problems in order for them to gain an understating of the concepts in order to apply this knowledge in the successful completion of a multi-steps problem without being prompted to do so. In order for this to be successful, students will be provided direct instruction, followed by guided instruction and then the opportunity for their completion of said task/question. Graphic organizers, materials, and content specific scaffolds will be provided to support and engage the student. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? THE DAILY LESSON The delivery of lessons at IS 349 will follow the daily lesson format.  The teacher identifies and reviews the topic Leads a review of the do now/journal entry  Introduces and explains the new concepts, tasks and skills   Enlists students’ input in the guided practice while modeling the concepts and skills  Provides the use of relevant materials in a group work setting  Provides problems of varying difficulty as independent/group practice  Closely monitors and notes student engagement and understandings   Assigns and explains relevant homework, Facilitates a structured discussion; provides opportunity for an effective lesson summary and collects an exit slip The Daily Lesson Checklist: Do Now/Journal Entry:  The do now/journal entry gets students thinking about the topic, concepts and skills they will be learning.  The do now/journal entry is used to activate students’ prior knowledge or connect a concept to their experiences, giving them practice to evaluate prior learning and engage them cognitively.  The do now/journal entry should provide an opportunity to engage in higher order thinking skills. Mini-Lesson:  Review or connect the topic to Common Core State Standards and NY State Standards.  Explain how/why the topic is important and relevant for students to study at this time.   Provide students with the opportunity to share responses to the do now/journal entry prompt – connect to Identify and preview performance tasks, skills and learner’s outcomes. students’ experiences. Students should engage in a turn and talk to share their responses in their small groups.   Enlist several student responses; facilitate students to call on other students to comment, add or challenge responses. Introduce new content; relate it to the essential question, tasks, learning objectives identified.   Model a skill necessary to successfully complete the learning activity. Work Period:  Provide students with 20-25 minutes [for a single period] of active intellectual engagement through a variety of instructional activities consisting of higher order thinking questions including independent practice, partner or group work.  The instructional activity should require students to apply the new skill modeled during the mini-lesson.  Differentiate to create multiple entry points for all learners for the tasks, activities, materials, processes and products based on student performance. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  Scaffolds will be provided if needed   Assign opportunities for students to apply the new skill and context in new ways.  Set aside time to confer with individual students during the practice phase of the lesson. Summary/Closure:  Allow students (individual and groups) to share out their learning outcomes; enlists alternate views/opinions and opportunities for students to critically evaluate peer’s presentations.  Asses student learning and clarify students’ misconceptions; record errors in understanding and application of new skills.  Pose 2-3 questions based on the essential question to assess student’s understanding of the lesson’s learning targets.  Assign students an exit slip based on the day’s lesson and new skill/idea that was taught.  Close the lesson by briefly reviewing the lesson, stressing the importance of what was learned and offers last minute comments and reminders. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will provide students with multiple entry points based on data from the inquiry work that was gathered during grade team meetings. This will begin by examining data collected from the learning style inventories provided in September 2018. Teachers will review and adjust curricula in order to incorporate opportunities for our visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactual learners to gain access into the material. In addition, IEPs will be closely examined to ensure that modifications are included into daily practise. Data regarding our ELLs proficiently will be addressed and based on need modifications may include sentence starters, bi-lingual dictionaries, word walls with pictures, etc. Creation of multiple entry points including scaffolds, will also be based on the analysis of student performance on a variety of assessments used to identify areas of needs. Common trends will be tracked school wide via academic and needs in order to reduce frequency and strengthen instruction and comprehension. Additionally, teachers will engage in cycles of professional learning using the Data Wise School Improvement process to surface best practices and create multiple entry points for all learners. Lastly, the school has identified two master teachers to provide model classrooms in creating multiple entry points for all learners. One Master teacher will work with ELA teachers in the development of multiple entry points for all learners, and the second Master teacher will work with Math teachers in the development of multiple entry points for all learners throughout the Math department. Professional developments will be based on data collected from periodic school wide assessments, content specific need/gaps, methods to address student need via the collection of data from learning style inventories, teacher surveys, tracking of teacher observation feedback (addressing common trends), etc. Professional development will be differentiated where ever possible in order to provide individuals with quality support based on their need. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? The school has a strategic assessment plan that will provide a series of formative and summative assessments to be administered to students to track progress towards mastery throughout the year. The primary assessment used by the school will be the adaptive iReady assessment, which will provide data on student progress in both Math and ELA. The school will also use the static Ready assessment as a paper baseline and final assessment to track student progress. Additionally, the school will utilize TC Writing Pathways rubric to track student progress in writing. Lastly, the school will implement a portfolio system to track student progress over the course of the school year and empower students to engage in regular Student-led Conferences to support their ability to reflect on their progress towards mastery. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) NYC Performance Task Baseline Diagnostic Diagnostic, progress monitoring Diagnostic, Summative Diagnostic, Formative Ready and iReady Assessment in ELA and Math New York City Performance Task EOY Fall & Spring English Language Learner Assessment Part 3 – Annual Goal 6-8 6-8 6-8 6-8 Baseline Data Track student performance Measure student progress in all subjects. Track ELL progress during year Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, through regularly administered assessments aligned to NYS CCLS in ELA and Math, followed by the implementation of targeted interventions based upon power standards, students will demonstrate an overall increase 10% performance as measured by the average Math and ELA proficiency rating on the NYS ELA and math NYS exams. (DTSDE Tenet 2 & 3) (Q.R. 1.1, 1.2, 2.2 & 3.4) (MOTP 1a, 1e, 3b, 3c & 3d) (MPPR Domains 1, 2, 5 & 6) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Average Math Proficiency Rating 2.43 to 2.47 Performance Index on State Math Exam 87 to 91 Average ELA Proficiency Rating 2.36 to 2.52 n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Snapshot Assessments: All Students. ELA & Math Proficiency Rating, Math Performance Index September 2018 through June 2019 Assistant Principal, ELA & Math Teachers. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Progress will be monitored on formative assessments including progress in iReady and student progress on Snapshot Assessments Progress will be monitored through monthly reviews of assessment data in I/O Assessment. Teachers will implement a series of assessments derived from a released NYSED exam questions in ELA and Math by standard to be able to track student mastery in specific skill subsets. Assessments will be administered in regularly scheduled intervals. I/O Assessment: Teachers will engage in a cycle of professional learning to develop their knowledge in aligning the snapshot assessments to standards in I/O Assessment, analyzing data, and creating modifications to curriculum based upon the analysis of the data. Teacher Team Meetings: Teachers teams will meet bi-weekly to analyze data, identify All Teachers. Math Proficiency Rating, Performance Index on State Math Exam, ELA Proficiency Rating September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers All teachers Math Proficiency Rating, Performance Index on State Math Exam, Item Analysis report, ELA Proficiency Rating Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders September 2018 through June 2019 Progress will be monitored through a regular review of Teacher Team Meeting 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  gaps, review and analyze student work, and collaboratively develop interventions based upon gaps in student skills resulting in the implementation of designated intervention days to provide students with high-quality interventions. The structure of the cycle will allow teachers to analyze student performance on a specific standard through a snapshot assessment, review the students work, design an intervention, implement the intervention, and re-assess targeted students to determine the effectiveness of the intervention and work collaboratively to develop next steps. Intervention Days: During specifically identified class periods on a regular schedule, students will engage in intervention days in which they engage in an intervention based upon an analysis of snapshot assessment data. Interventions will include a combination of teacher and student led instruction based upon specific standards, with extension activities for those students who have demonstrated mastery. Provide targeted interventions for students through the use of the iReady agendas and minutes during Instructional Leadership Team meetings. Progress will be monitored through progress on snapshot and iReady assessments during weekly Instructional Leadership Team meetings. All Students Math Proficiency Rating, Performance Index on State Math Exam, ELA Proficiency Rating October 2018 through June 2019. All teachers All students Math Proficiency Rating, Performance Index on State Math Exam September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, All teachers Progress will be monitored through iReady diagnostic data 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  platform for both ELA and Math. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement and usage data. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will host a series of workshops for parents on reading and understanding the snapshot and iReady results. They will also learn strategies to support students learning at home. Workshops will take place monthly from September 2018 through May 2019. In addition, parents will be provided workshops addressing the curricula for both ELA and math. These workshops and/or materials will be provided by content teachers and/or the parent coordinator. Parents will be able to know the key topics targeted within the curricula, ongoing supports provided to students to include the CBO, where they can also receive supports to better understand the CCLS requirements and assist with the success of their child, etc. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Resources to support the achievement of the annual goal include: ● The programmatic use of teacher common planning periods to allow teachers to meet in departments weekly. ● Weekly meetings with the Instructional Cabinet. ● Funding of two Master Teacher Roles. Title I funding to purchase I/O Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, students will have demonstrated 10% progress towards mastery through snapshot assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess progress we will use iReady diagnostic in Math & ELA, snapshot assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed n/a X n/a n/a 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school has gone to great lengths to create a supportive environment for all students. Weekly Student Success Team Meetings provided targeted support for student attendance, resulting in a daily attendance rate of 93.31%. Additionally the school has the following systems in place:  The school has implemented the Peer Group Connection (PGC) program, providing an opportunity for 8th  graders to serve as peer leaders for incoming 6th graders and make them feel more welcome at the school. Success mentors are assigned to individual students whose attendance dips below 90%, or students who have a negative attendance pattern. Success mentors are provided training during various points of the school year.  Teachers contact parents to discuss academic and/or social difficulties of students. Parents are informed of possible referral to the Pupil Personal Team ( PPT ) for further discussion of preventative & alternative services that may be provided.  Each student is known by at least one staff member through the school’s advisory program. The advisors develop & maintain relationships with the families of their advisees.  The advisory program is scheduled for each class on every grade level.  The guidance counselor provides individual, small group, and family counseling.  The Ridgewood-Bushwick Afterschool Program is a partnership within the school that supports the needs of targeted students by monitoring attendance, providing counseling, and parent outreach. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  Through the Community Schools initiative, the school and the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) have partnered with Interborough to provide a part time Social Worker to support students' mental health and a part time Family Caseworker to support families in crisis and need of critical social services. Priority Need: The priority need exists in the number of students who are identified as chronically absent in the 7th and 8th grade. Currently, 19% of 6th and 7th grade students have an attendance rate of less than 90%. In addition, the total parentage of attendance for the year was 93.1%. The need is focused on increasing this to a minimum of 93.8% for the year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? The key stakeholders of the school desire for I.S. 349 to be described as a school where students feel intellectually safe and nurtured. Additionally, the school wishes to be described as a warm and welcoming environment for all students, including the large population of students with limited English proficiency. Data reveals that students at the school come from a high-needs community and there are limited supports in place to address their needs. Our partnership with CSS will foster collaboration by building a shared vision with school partners to provide students and their families with coordinated programming targeting individual academic, social, emotional, and developmental needs. Through identifying barriers to student success as well as the appropriate services and resources to address these obstacles, the CBO will work with appropriate school partners and city agencies to provide additional services for students and families to meet their different needs. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Center for Supportive Schools Peer Group Connection, Success Mentoring, Salvadori Center and Pratt academic enrichment partnerships Mental Health Services and Social Services for Parents/Families Interborough Developmental and Consultation Center How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? IS 349 will employ an approach to family engagement that emphasizes the role of families as partners in their children’s education. From curriculum nights to parent workshops, and trips, families will be an integral part of the school community and parents will have opportunities to learn how to nurture their children’s academic and social emotional needs. Families will be also supported through Interborough by having a part time Family Case Worker who will support families in crisis and need of critical social services. Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school will continue to provide a mentoring program for chronically absent students to set personalized attendance goals while receiving social-emotional supports from staff members. In addition, we will continue the implementation of a shared student-attendance tracking system to provide students with continuous data to monitor their progress in order to achieve an average daily attendance of 93.8%. (DTSDE Tenet 2 & 5) (Q.R. 1.4 & 3.4) (MPPR Domains 1, 3 & 4) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Completion of the tracking system by the end of September Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Development of student data tracking system: Student Success Team Student Attendance July 2018 - June 2019 Principal, CSD, Student Success Team The school will develop an individual student data tracking system to provide students and teachers with regular updates regarding their progress towards attendance and academic benchmarks. The school will develop a student friendly document to share with individual students and a larger poster to ensure that students are aware of their progress towards these goals. The members of the Student Success team will be responsible for the development of this tracking system. Advisory Class: Students will participate in a weekly advisory class where they will participate in All students, specifically targeting chronically absent students Student Attendance September 2018-June 2019 Advisory Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director (CSD) Monitoring of attendance during weekly Student Success meetings by 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  a curriculum that will focus on positive academic behaviors and the impact attendance has on success. As part of this advisory class, students will periodically review their student tracking reports, highlighting their attendance data. Students will set individual attendance goals during advisory. Chronically absent students will be strategically programmed to be matched with the most effective adviser. Student Success Mentors: Each chronically absent student will be matched with a success mentor, who will follow up with students on a daily basis to monitor their attendance. Success Mentors will have access to student data reports to provide students with detailed information regarding their attendance, and work collaboratively to develop an attendance improvement plan to overcome any shortcomings. Mentors will be provided with periodic professional learning sessions facilitated by CSS. Student Data Tracking System Bulletin Boards: utilizing the New Visions Data Tracking Tool. Monitoring of attendance during weekly Student Success meetings by utilizing the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Student Sorter data tracking tools. Student Attendance Chronically absent students. September 2018 through June 2019 Success Mentors, CSD All students Student Attendance Principal, CSD, Student Success Team September, 2018 through June 2019. Monitoring of attendance during weekly Student 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  The school will update the "Are you AHEAD?" bulletin boards on a monthly basis to reflect the most up to date student progress data. The boards will be color coded, with students, identified by OSIS number, above 95% attendance in green, students between 90-95% attendance in yellow, and students below 90% attendance in red. Annual 6th Grade Retreat: This year we will have a day trip to Chelsea Piers where 6th Grade students engage in a series of Social Emotional Learning Activities to build a stronger sense of community and strengthen relationships between teachers and students, and peer to peer relationships. 6th Grade students Student Attendance October 2018 CSD, Assistant Principal, 6th Grade teachers CSD, Social Worker July 2018 through June 2019 Mental Health Clinic: All Students Student Attendance I.S. 349 will operate a mental health clinic with a full time Social Worker to provide clinical treatment for students based upon need. The Social Worker will participate during Student Success Meetings, and identify students with an attendance rate below 95% and conduct screening activities. Success meetings by utilizing the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Student Sorter data tracking tools. Monitoring of attendance during weekly Student Success meetings by utilizing the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Student Sorter data tracking tools. Monitoring of attendance during weekly Student Success meetings by utilizing the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Student Sorter data tracking tools. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. An overview of the student data tracking system will be shared with parents during orientation during the last week of August 2018. Additional information will be shared through regular mailings, and targeted support meetings for individual students with the Success Mentor based upon need. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Members of the Student Success Team will be scheduled to meet weekly to review student attendance data and trends.  The school's Data Analyst will update student information on the "Are you Ahead?" template monthly.  Success Mentors will be provided with per session to attend training. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the number of students identified with daily attendance of 90% will increase to 94% through supports and interventions. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily Attendance Rate through the New Visions Attendance Heat Map. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a n/a x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? During the 2017-18 school year the school made progress in the area of teacher collaborations through the implementation of the Year 2 Data Wise School Improvement Program, participating as a model school. Grade and Department teams were able to engage in meaningful collaborations through this system, while implementing the Data Wise process. This led to a Proficient rating in QR indicator 4.2. Priority Need: Though the school has made progress, Students with Disabilities (SWDs) continue to struggle with the NYSED ELA exam. To improve these outcomes, the school needs to identify highly effective teaching practices and curricular resources to implement across all classrooms. In addition, high quality IEPs will be created to include Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) elements. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? The vision for Collaborative Teachers is to engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership in the Data Wise model to improve student learning. To achieve this, common planning time will be provided weekly for teachers to meet, discuss, review data, share strategies, and promote teacher collaboration. Specifically, teachers will be scheduled for one period a week to meet in grade teams 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  and one period a week to meet in department teams to engage in structured protocols that would support and enhance student achievement. School leaders have developed a cycle for teams to meet that conducts vertical meetings and also meetings as an entire staff. During the whole staff sessions, opportunities will be available for teams to share their findings, strategies, or challenges. Teams will use the other portion of time to develop team building strategies, management and leadership skills. The goal is for teachers to collaborate more and work on establishing a common language in order to increase their instructional capacity. Distributive leadership structures allow teachers to work on committees. Teachers’ voices are instrumental in key decisions. The work of teams will result in progress towards goals for groups of students or improved student outcomes. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Through weekly meetings in which they analyze data and instructional walk-throughs, the Instructional Leadership Team will debrief and identify instructional best practices to share across the school. Additionally, the instructional cabinet will analyze various sources of data, including periodic assessments and observation data to identify areas for professional development. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? During common planning, teachers will develop learning tasks that provide opportunities for students to engage in writing activities, as well as discussions to further their comprehension of complex skills and ideas. Through the creation of multiple entry points for all learners, teachers will ensure students are able to access rigorous materials and engage in higher order thinking skills to provide a point of access for all learners in the curriculum. These multiple entry points will also provide opportunities to address the learning needs of higher achieving students. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration across teacher teams will provide teachers with an opportunity to share instructional best practices and implement them in classrooms. Through sharing these best practices teachers will be able to support students in achieving improved student learning outcomes. In addition, teachers will work together via inquiry cycles in order to review data and identify common trends. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Periodic Assessments Track student progress towards mastery, identify best practices. Observation Data Surface areas of growth in teaching practice and address through professional learning. Scholarship reports Correlate student performance on periodic assessments and grades to ensure instruction is rigorous. Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teachers will work collaboratively in weekly inquiry team cycles to analyze student data in order to improve instruction and implement effective teaching practices resulting in an increase of 10% performance as measured by the average NYS ELA and math exams. (DTSDE Tenet 2, 3 & 4) (Q.R. 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 3.4, 4.2) (MOTP (1e, 3b, 4e) (MPPR Domains 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA Proficiency Rating Framework Element: Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Student performance on periodic assessments, observation data Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018- July 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Members of Instructional Cabinet Instructional Leadership Team: All SWDs Average ELA Proficiency The school's Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) will meet to develop professional learning cycles to support the improvement of teaching across the school, driven by an analysis of Advance data. This process will include the regular debrief of instructional walk-throughs, and analysis of various streams of student data resulting in modifications to cycles of professional learning to support SWDs. Grade Team Meetings: All SWDs Average ELA Proficiency Teachers will implement the Data Wise System to conduct inquiry work, focusing on best instructional strategies to support SWDs through the creation of multiple entry points for during weekly September 2018- July 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Members of Instructional Cabinet Student performance on periodic assessments, observation data 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  grade team meetings. These meetings will be facilitated by a member of the Instructional Leadership Team, and monitored by either the Principal or an Assistant Principal Common Planning Periods: All Team Teachers Average ELA Proficiency September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Member of Instructional Cabinet All ELA Team-Teachers will be assigned a weekly common planning period to support their ability to effectively modify curriculum to provide multiple entry points for SWDs. Co-Teaching Training: To improve the instructional effectiveness of the integrated model, teachers will engage in embedded professional learning through the utilization of an instructional coach. The coach will work with teachers to provide additional structures and supports that further the effectiveness of teaching practices and impact student learning. All Team Teachers Average ELA Proficiency September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, Team Teachers Student performance on periodic assessments, observation data, review of curriculum maps and unit plans. Student performance on periodic assessments, observation data, review of curriculum maps and unit plans. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will hold a bi-monthly workshop for all parents to include supports for ELLS, SWDs, and the lowest third in order to provide strategies to best meet their child's needs at home from November through June. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teachers will be programmed to provide weekly common planning periods for teacher teams to meet in both grade and department teams and to provide an additional preparation for weekly common planning. ● Scheduled time for the Instructional Cabinet to meet on a weekly basis on Thursdays (ILT meetings) ● Funding for Team Teaching coaches, lead teachers, and a model teacher to support teachers with improving student academic outcome. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, co-teaching teams will engage in targeted cycles of professional development and coaching resulting in increased student achievement as measured by an increase of 5% of student with disabilities performance as measured by the Ready ELA exam. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress on periodic assessments including iReady and Ready diagnostic exams. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). n/a n/a X n/a Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: During the 2017-18, the school made progress in the effectiveness of teaching and learning through the implementation of the creation of shared instructional expectations across the school, developed during professional development with teachers, coupled with a shared definition of rigor developed by the school's instructional cabinet. As a result of this process, the school improved from a rating of an overall rating of proficient from the 2016-17 school year to proficient with 2 well developed ratings for the 2017-18 school year on the Quality Review. Additionally, the percentage of students scoring a level 3 or 4 on the NYS math state exam increased from 12% to 23% and 17% to 27% for ELA as per the latest NYS assessment data. Priority Needs: To further improve student learning outcomes, the school needs to continue to spread effective teaching practices across all classrooms, ensuring that all students engage in daily rigorous tasks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Rich Text Editor, 5005 Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The school leaders will work collaboratively with staff and other stakeholders to develop and implement a shared vision and mission. They will establish expectations, identify barriers, and set goals to achieve organizational effectiveness. Diverse stakeholders, including those with conflicting perspectives will be engaged in ways that build a shared understanding and commitment in an effort to foster ownership of the vision of the school. To ensure strong CBO partnership, the principal will advocate for and act on commitments in the vision, mission, and goals to provide equitable, appropriate, and effective learning opportunities for every learner. Systems in place to measure improvement will be: teacher observations, student-teacher surveys, and Quality Review. The school leader will monitor student progress on periodic assessments and engage teachers in conversations based upon student achievement on these assessments. Additionally, the school leader will monitor teacher performance in the Advance system, tracking teacher ratings in each of the components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Based upon the monitoring of these systems, the school leader will provide targeted supports for teachers and adjust school programs to support student learning. Supports will include actionable feedback, referral to professional development for teachers, and teacher intervisitation. The school leader will collaborate with members of the school instructional cabinet to ensure these supports are impactful. These collaborations will occur during regularly scheduled meetings. The school will provide additional instructional time in literacy and math to support student achievement in these subjects. Additionally, Extended Learning Time will be provided for five hours per week to support student achievement. Organization of student and teacher programs will be designed to achieve the following: ● Show collective responsibility for student learning by helping students achieve at higher levels ● Allow teachers to benefit from higher levels of professional learning ● Provide avenues for teacher to share teaching practices and engage in critical conversations about improving instruction ● Improve student achievement and their professional practice at the same time that they promote shared leadership To conduct observations school leaders will implement the Advance system, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching as the primary tool in evaluating teacher performance. Additionally, the following principles will guide the observation and feedback process: ● Engaging teachers in continuous dialogue regarding teaching practice ● Holding teachers accountable for multiple measures of student learning, growth, and achievement ● Professional dialogue during pre and post observations ● Short, frequent cycles of observation (approximately every 4 weeks) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41 ● Tailored professional development opportunities based upon observation data On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? To increase the opportunities for teacher leaders to develop and enact action plans to improve the effectiveness of teaching across the school. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? The school instructional vision and mission statement will be revised collaboratively during the first faculty meeting held on September 5, 2018. Once agreed upon this will be visible throughout the school, in each classroom, within the staff handbook, on observation reports, discussed throughout the year during meetings and professional learning sessions, etc. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The school leader will delegate specific roles and responsibilities to assistant principal, teacher leaders and the community school director based upon their individual strengths. These responsibilities will be monitored during weekly cabinet meetings and individually scheduled weekly check-ins. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The school will have an open door policy to welcome parents. Additionally, parent constituents will be welcomed and encouraged to join the School Leadership Team(SLT). SLT meetings will be held monthly. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Through regularly scheduled cycles. Within an appropriate time frame. Based on experience as a school leader, experience working within central offices of the NYCDOEincluding the Office of Teacher Effectiveness, and both personal and professional integrity. Additionally, holding NYScertification as a School Building Leader and multiple Masters Degrees from a nationally ranked Graduate School of Education. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Data Wise Inquiry Work Professional development sessions Instructional Cabinet Danielson Framework for Teaching Professional development sessions and instructional walk-throughs Director of School Renewal, Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Students will be programmed for a standard academic schedule. Additionally, students will be programmed for targeted AIS services through the iReady ELA/ Math program and the GoMath program based upon an analysis of student data. Students will also be provided with additional enrichment opportunities via RiseBorogh and our CBO programs. The school will implement ELT Model #1 to maximize financial resources and to support student learning. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, through targeted cycles of observations and feedback, the average teacher performance in the component of student engagement (3c) of the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) rubric will increase by an average of .25 as measured by the MOTP ratings in Advance. (DTSDE Tenet 2, 3 & 4) (Q.R 1.2, 1.4, 4.1) (MOTP 3c and 4e) (MPPR Domains 1, 2, 3, 5, 6) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State Math Exam 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State Math Exam Principal, Assistant Principal September, 2018-October 2018 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Review of teacher created next steps. All Teachers Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State Math Exam Principal October, 2018-November 2018 Review of student achievement goals. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. All teachers will have an individual Initial Planning Conference with a school leader. During this meeting, instructional expectations will be shared, and teachers will have the opportunity to reflect upon their current practice. At the conclusion of this conference, teachers will collaborate to identify next steps and the supports required to enact these next steps. All teachers will engage in a data meeting, reviewing student achievement data based on NYSED assessments and baseline assessments. Teachers will collaborate to identify the appropriate supports for students based upon their needs. At the conclusion of this meeting, teachers will identify a SMART goal for the student achievement during 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  the year. Teachers will engage in two subsequent meetings during the school year, a mid-year check-in to review benchmark assessment results, and a final meeting in late May to review student progress and develop a SMART goal for the next school year. School leaders will engage in norming activities to ensure that ratings are calibrated across the school. Additionally, the administrative cabinet will meet to review all observation reports to ensure that teachers are provided with actionable next steps. After conducting the initial round of norming activities, the administrative cabinet will conduct additional norming activities as needed to ensure consistent feedback is provided to all teachers. Additional support will be provided by the district Teacher Evaluation and Development Coach during monthly visits. Administrators will engage in continuous observation and feedback cycles. Each cycle will last approximately four weeks, and will provide teachers with actionable feedback and next steps for improvement. September, 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Administrators Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State Math Exam Review of observation data and observation reports, with a particular focus on actionable feedback to teachers. All Teachers Average Math Proficiency Rating September, 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State Math Exam Review of observation data and periodic assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45 Model Teacher, Peer Collaborative Teacher Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating Performance Index on State Math Exam September 2018- June 2019 Model Teacher, Peer Collaborative Teacher Review of observation data and periodic assessments. Teachers will be provided with targeted professional learning opportunities based upon each cycle of observation, with next steps including, but not limited to, intervisitations, in-house professional learning opportunities, outside professional learning opportunities, buddy teachers, and Learn modules. Model Classrooms: The school's Master Teacher and Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) will develop model classrooms and conduct weekly intervisitations with targeted teachers using the school intervisitation protocol. Teachers participating in intervisitation will be identified during weekly individual meetings with the PCT and Master Teachers. The focus of intervisitations will be aligned to the Instructional Focus, and determined by the Instructional cabinet based upon a review of student data, Advance data, and trends identified during walk-throughs. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  The principal will host events to include "Coffee with the Principal" and provide workshops and discussion sessions with parents based on need and interest in order to engage parents in discussions around the climate, culture and teaching in learning in the school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include: ● Time scheduled for norming activities among administrators ● Per Diem subs for coverage for professional learning opportunities ● Funds for outside professional learning opportunities Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, teachers will have 2 cycles of observations completed. Professional developments and supports sessions will focus around the outcomes in order to strengthen components on the MOTP and teacher practise. This should have a positive affect on components 3c of the MOTP with an increase of .25 average for the school year. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation reports, diagnostic exam results including iReady and Ready assessments, and Imagine assessments to track ELL progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed n/a n/a n/a x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school has developed systems to support communication with parents, including the implementation of Skedula across the school. Additionally, according to the NYC School Survey, [include data regarding parent from Survey upon public release of data]. The school has also collaborated with CSS to provide a part time family caseworker to support families in need. Parent participation increased throughout the year, culminating with the Community School Forum in which 187 parents signed in and participated in the forum. Additionally, the number of parents completing the School Survey increased by 21% to 67% of parents completing a school survey. Priority Need: Based upon consultation with the SLT, parents expressed a desire to increase the level of awareness of student progress among families. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Within the Community School model, the focus is on the whole child. Community resources will be strategically organized to support students and connect to the community, while supporting the core instructional program. IS 349’s objective is to create a welcoming and engaging climate with strong relationships and communications between families and school staff. Upon entering the building families will immediately be greeted by a Security Officer. Signs and directions are posted in English and Spanish. The main office is located on the third floor. Once they arrive, they will 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  greeted by a staff member that is gladly willing to offer assistance. The Parent Coordinator is also a key person available in creating a welcoming environment for parents. To support families and their involvement in the school community, the school will do the following: ● Create and implement high-impact family engagement strategies that drive student achievement and school improvement. ● Effectively engage the school community in school planning, budgeting, and plan implementation. ● Create welcoming and inviting schools where all people feel welcome. ● School leadership and parent and community leaders effectively partner and communicate. ● Leverage community partnerships to enhance students learning and experiences. Along with our efforts, our CBO, Center for Support Schools (CSS), will provide additional Community Outreach by doing the following: ● Outreach and Enrollment Process which will involve parent information forums, individual family meetings and student orientations ● Parent Engagement and Empowerment services - to target families in need of crisis intervention. ● Home visits will be conducted; parent meetings will be planned with families on an as-needed basis; CSS staff members will collaborate with the Parent Coordinator and Attendance Supervisor on parent workshops and work to develop strategies encouraging greater family involvement in other school activities. Parents will be provided with a dedicated space in the form of a PTA room equipped with computers and phones to support PTA activities. Additionally, the PTA will have access to a dedicated room to hold parent meetings and workshops. In collaboration with CSS, families will be offered adult learning opportunities in the form of English Language classes and additional parental workshops. These workshops will be provided based upon parent surveys, identifying the areas of need within the community. Families will be able to access and understand student data and progress through the implementation of Datacation's PupilPath program. This program provides parents with information regarding student progress both academically and socially. Parents will be provided with training on how to access and understand PupilPath during school events. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Beginning of year and end of year events for families, such as open houses over the summer for incoming 6th grade families, will serve to welcome families into the IS 349 community. Other spaces such as Community School Forums and Community School Team (CST) meetings will create opportunities for parents to meet one another and build community. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Communication (e.g. flyers, letters, calls) from the school to families will be in both English and Spanish to meet the language needs of the community. The Community School Director (CSD) will work to create a “Community Resource Room” space for families to receive information and resources about Community School services, ask questions, and raise concerns to the CSD. Welcome signs with directions to the space will be placed on the walls of the school in both English and Spanish. Security will be also trained and informed of all activities so as to better direct parents/families upon entering the school. SSA - building safety meetings will also take place. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The PTA, SLT and CST structures will allow the school to provide spaces for families to take on leadership roles and share their input regarding school decision making. Furthermore, the community needs assessment that will be implemented and facilitated by CSS will allow families to make their voices heard and share their perspectives on critical school issues. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school works in close partnership with the Community Based Organization to ensure the involvement of the community and families. In September 2018, parents participated in a survey that identifies a common time that most are available for meetings. In addition, there is consistent communication through phone and email as well as systems in place such as Skedula allow for staff and families to regularly update each other on students’ progress. Furthermore, events outside of “Back to School Night” and Parent Teacher Conferences such as Curriculum Night, Community School Team meetings, parent workshops, parent focus groups, and classroom visits provide unique opportunities for IS 349 to engage its families and the wider community. Informal, school-based events allow for teachers and other staff members to get to know the families of their students in a deeper way and build strong, sustainable relationships with them that are built on mutual trust and respect. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Curriculum Night Parent Workshops Family Case Worker Inform parents of CCLS being taught and strategies for helping their child at home Give parents the tools to nurture their child’s social emotional health A family caseworker from Interborough works with families to provide resources and guidance based on their individual needs three days/week How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Family participation parent-teacher conferences and curriculum nights as well as active involvement in governance structures, such as IS 349’s PTA and SLT. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  Family partnerships with CBO: Family participation in community needs assessment, attendance at events such as Community School Forums, trips, and workshops, and working with Interborough’s family caseworker to obtain needed services and resources. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? The Community School Director has created a “Community Resource Room” space in the CS office. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? IS 349, in collaboration with CSS, is working to develop a partnership with RiseBoro to connect parents to ESL classes in the Bushwick community for the 2019-20 school year. Our long-term vision is to create a sustainable structure for adult education in the school building through working with the Office of Adult and Continuing Education (OACE). What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Skedula provides a day-to-day feedback loop for families to be up to date on their students’ academic progress. Formal structures in place such as parent-teacher conferences provide the time and space for families to engage in in-depth dialogue with their children’s teachers regarding scholastic success. Lastly, periodic two-way communication between teachers and families is an important key to ensuring that both teachers and families are kept up to date regarding academic progress and social emotional development. The school staff will work with families to ensure that their preferences for communication method (e.g. phone call vs. email) are met as well as obstacles to language barriers are addressed (e.g. sending home letters in the appropriate home language). Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, personalized parent outreach/communication effort, as well as, opportunities for parent empowerment through school leadership structures such as Parent Association (PA), School Leadership Team (SLT), and the Community School Team (CST), will lead to an increase of parental involvement at the school as measured by a 10% increase in positive parent responses to the NYC School Survey questions in the 'Parent Involvement in School' section. (DTSDE Tenet 6) (Q.R. 3.4) (MPPR Domain 4) (MPPR Domain 4) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The SLT will meet in an on-going basis to plan & develop school goals, decide on educational priorities; review & revise the RSCEP. The school will implement the Pupilpath system to inform all parents including SWD and ELLs of student goals and progress toward meeting those goals. Parents will receive training in the Skedula platform during Parent-Teacher Conferences. Additional training will be provided during workshops led by CSS. The use of Pupilpath will ensure that parents are aware of student progress and understand the link between positive academic results and college preparation. Parent outreach in the form of organized factual reports to the Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties September, 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, CSD How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) SLT Agendas and sign-in sheets. Parents/Students Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties September, 2018-June 2019 CSD, Parent Coordinator Regular monitoring of parent log-ins to Skedula system Parents Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties September, 2018-June 2019 Principal, CSD, Parent Coordinator Sign-in sheets at parent events 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52 Parents Framework Element: Strong Family-Community Ties September, 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director Sign-in sheets at workshops, pre and post survey results. community about student academic process through school messenger, newsletters, progress reports & report cards. Parent workshops will be held on a monthly providing additional information on the "Are you Ahead?" tracking system. These workshops will be conducted in collaboration with CSS, Additionally, the school will also administer a survey to track parent awareness of post-secondary opportunities at the beginning and end of the school year. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include a partnership with CSS, and the work of the Community School Director. Funding to permit the school for parent workshops. Per session for school staff to attend parent workshops. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  By February 2019, through monthly workshops on the schools "Are you AHEAD?" data tracking systems, the number of parent log-ins to Skedula will increase by 10% as compared to Skedula during the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regular review of Skedula log-ins during SLT meetings. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of a targeted academic intervention services period for our students to include a focus on our lowest third each day, the percentage of students performing at Level 1 on the NYSED ELA exam will decrease by 10%. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. After successfully implementing ELT during the 2017-18 school year, IS 349 will once again provide an additional five hours of mandated instruction each week throughout the 2018-19 school year. The school plans to extend the school day for one hour each day, resulting in students engaging in a nine period day as opposed to the traditional eight period day. This additional instructional period will be programmed by the individual needs of each student, providing either academic intervention services or enrichment opportunities. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The academic program model will include additional learning opportunities for each student by offering a block of ELA instruction, Math instruction, and targeted interventions provided in collaboration with CSS. Supports will include:  Salvadori Center program: Salvadori programs promote college and career readiness, emphasize higher order thinking skills, incorporate the Danielson Framework for Teaching, provide scaffolds in English and high-quality supports and extensions, yield student work products that reflect high levels of thinking, participation and ownership. Through our partnership, a math and science enrichment program, grade-appropriate curricula will be provided to every class in grade 6 for 32 weeks of the school year. In the BRIDGES program, for example, students will identify the characteristics that make a bridge unique, investigate the different types of bridges and their functions, and learn about the history of some of the world’s most prominent bridges. Students will also be able to identify the structural parts that make up different types of bridges, and understand the forces that enable each bridge to support a load. For their final project, students will work in teams to develop a proposal that addresses a community problem and then construct a scale model of a truss bridge. Vocabulary and math skills will be taught as integral components of the program.  Pratt Institute classes: Through a partnership with the Pratt Institute, undergraduate and graduate students will serve as literacy and design fellows at IS 349, conducting push-in, small group tutoring in classrooms and leading a space design class in which students learn to design spaces using computer programs and 3D printers. At the end of the design program, students travel to the Pratt Institute and Brooklyn Navy Yard to present their final design projects to a panel of graduate professors from the architecture school. The additional supports in ELA and Math will improve the likelihood of student graduation and preparation for high school. The academic program will meet the unique learning needs of students by offering smaller group instruction, targeting specific student needs. Additionally, the elective courses offered will be grounded in either literacy or math instruction, and provide an opportunity for students to experience learning opportunities in unique methods. A group of approximately 20 students will participate in the Wilson program. The program will be supervised by the principal through bi-weekly meetings with teachers to monitor student progress as measured by Lexile levels. Families will be contacted via letters and phones, informing them of the academic model and the importance of student attendance. Additionally, during school events and parent workshops, parents will have the opportunity to learn more about the 9-period day. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Outreach to families will be made in partnership with CSS, the school's Parent Coordinator, and other key staff to communicate expectations regarding the academic program model. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The ELT program will be incorporated into the regular school day as a ninth period and will be supervised as such. All school leaders will be responsible for the implementation and oversight of the program. The ELT program will be instructed by licensed teachers, as it is being implemented as a split-program. The school will assess the impact of the ELT by monitoring periodic assessments as part of the Instructional Leadership Team meeting. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The program will start September 2018 and end in June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Title I & TL funds will be used to support our activities. The program will run each day, extending the school day from 8:15AM-3:44PM. Teachers will work on a split schedule to support the implementation of the program. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, 10% of all students will demonstrate 75% of the annual growth target in ELA and Math as measured by the iReady diagnostic data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Periodic assessments as indicated in section 5A. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 1. By June 2019, 100% of students in each grade will complete an experiential learning program (e.g. Salvadori, Pratt design, etc.) and at least 80% of students will demonstrate mastery of key learning concepts and standards on the program's post assessment. 2. By June 2019, through the implementation of targeted success mentoring, monthly attendance incentives, and class attendance competitions, the percentage of students identified as chronically absent will decrease by 4% as measured by the average daily attendance rate. 3. By June 2019, the chronic absenteeism rate for students receiving mental health services will decrease by 2% as measured by the average daily attendance rate. 4. By June 2019, at least 90% of students who participate in PGC will demonstrate improvement in their academic skills as measured by i-Ready ELA and math online assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Strong Family-Community Ties Student Attendance Average ELA Proficiency Rating Average Math Proficiency Rating Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Interborough Salvadori Center Pratt Institute Chelsea Piers Interborough at-risk students 6th grade students selected classes 6th grade students parents/families in need mental health services push-in STEM program push-in tutoring and design classes grade-level student retreat resources and services for parents/families Peer Group Connection 6th/8th grade students peer leadership program Success Mentoring chronically absent students in grades 6-8 mentoring for students and family outreach conducted by CBO/school staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) will be the school’s lead CBO partner. In partnership with the school, CSS will hire a Community School Director. The Director will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy, facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The Director will drive development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. S/he will track the school’s progress against performance goals, collect school data, and support program evaluation activities and manage partnerships. The Director will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include: • Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners • Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs • Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey • Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including developing metrics for partnership evaluation • Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs • Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; Mentoring; and Early Childhood • Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and activities offered at the school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  • Implement and maintain a process that encourages referrals to programs and services offered at the school • Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions on weekly basis, as part of weekly Student Success Team meetings • Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by the SLT and other school stakeholders CSS, in partnership with the school, will assess all students’ personalized needs to ensure appropriate programming opportunities are provided within the school day and during Expanded Learning Time (ELT). Working with the principal, SLT, and CST, CSS will identify specialist partnerships to provide comprehensive expanded learning and enrichment opportunities, and mental health services to meet the needs of all students, such that every student and family has strong relationships with the school community and an individualized pathway to success. Specific student supports implemented will include:  Through a partnership with Interborough, both targeted students and families are offered mental health and social services supports. A full-time Social Worker will be on-site five days per week (Monday – Friday) to provide clinical mental health services to targeted students at an established on-site mental health clinic. A Family Case Worker will also be on-site three days per week (Wednesday - Friday) to provide social services supports to families.  Through a partnership with Chelsea Piers, all 6th graders will participate in a social and emotional skill building retreat day on March 17th. To encourage ELA and Math performance, students will understand that they need to complete key milestones to participate in this special trip. Additional trip opportunities and incentives will be provided to students based on achievements such as strong attendance (e.g. 95%+ attendance for the month of April).  Through a partnership with the Salvadori Center, all 6th grade classes at IS 349 will participate in a STEM-based Salvadori class one time a week for 32 weeks of the 2017-18 SY.  Utilizing community school funds, CSS will launch an in-house afterschool tutoring program in February 2019  to hire IS 349 teachers to prepare students in each grade for the NYS ELA and math exams. In partnership with CSS, IS 349 will also implement an additional evidence-based program to support students’ social and emotional development:  Peer Group Connection – Middle School (PGC-MS): A research-based program that supports and eases students’ successful transition into middle school. Centered on the themes of Identity, Community, and Leadership, the program taps into the power of 8th graders to create a nurturing environment for incoming middle school students. PGC-MS is the middle grades version of the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) flagship program, Peer Group Connection – High School (PGC-HS), an evidence-based and school-based program that supports and eases students’ transition from middle to high school. PGC has been recognized by the National Dropout Prevention Center as a Model Program demonstrating Strong Evidence of Effectiveness, its highest effectiveness rating, and evaluation results consistently demonstrate improvements in students’ academic, social, and emotional skills, resulting in significantly lower dropout rates; improved grades; fewer discipline referrals; and avoidance of high-risk behaviors. CSS will provide training to selected staff during Summer 2017 to prepare for program implementation in September 2018. Through monthly Community School Team meetings, parents will have the opportunity to engage in the progress of the community school work and provide feedback on the future directions of the work. The principal will meet with the assistant principals and the Community School Director and other key partner staff on a weekly basis to review leading indicators, including student attendance and performance data. Based upon analysis of this data, individual action plans will be created to provide additional social emotional supports for at-risk students. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The principal, assistant principal, and the community school director will oversee the programs. CSS will further support the ELT program by providing reserve teachers to facilitate smaller learning environments for all students and allowing targeted interventions for academically at-risk students. The community school director, in collaboration with the principal, will coordinate with the RiseBoro After School program to provide a voluntary after school program for students. The program will be monitored through weekly meetings tracking student attendance and student behavioral data through the OORS system. Additionally, at the close of each marking period, student scholarship will be reviewed to measure the impact of services to student performance in the classroom. Lastly, the administration of benchmark assessments will provide an additional data points to track student progress towards proficiency in ELA and Math. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Snacks will be provided by the Office of School Food and Nutrition. Student and teacher resources such as workbooks will need funding. The school will implement the Model 1 Renewal Hour model to ensure that services can be delivered to students and maximize their impact. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The program will start September 2018 and end June 2019. The program will run five days a week, with a minimum of one additional hour of instructional programming per day. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) This service focuses reading instruction on fluency . Small group Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Support to students whose reading performance is not at grade level as per the NYS ELA Scores . Support to students whosecomputative performance is not at grade level as per the NYS Math Scores. Student performance on in-house assessments. The need for guidance in satisfactorily completing the exit project. Student performance on in-house assessment. The need for guidance in satisfactorily completing the exit project. This service focuses math instruction on computation/analytical skills . The goal is to raise student achievement by providing opportunities to understand & apply scientific concepts, principles & theories set forth in the NYS / NYC Standards. This is done through organizers, experiments/presentations, field trips, research reports and/or exit projects. The goal of this program is to raise student achievement by providing opportunities to understand history through research & media films. Eighth grade students are also provided assistance toward completing exit projects. Small group Small group Extended Learning Time, Pull-out/Push-in services during the school day Extended Learning Time, Pull-out/Push-inservices during the school day Extended Learning Time, Pull-out/Push-in services during the school day Small group Extended Learning Time, Pull-out/Push-in services during the school day 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63 One on one /small group Pull-out services during the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guidance Counselor Identifies at-risk students & schedules as needed individual & group counseling to develop caring relationships with adults & obtain positive feedback which helps build self-esteem & self-confidence. Guidance -At-risk students will have the opportunity to share issues, in privacy, which may be impeding their social, emotional & academic progress. Through structured & progressive series of activities & experiences, students will increase their capacity to develop social, emotional, ethical & cognitive competencies. School Psychologist conducts a comprehensive evaluation of at-risk students’ academic, emotional & social progress. School Psychologist prescribes intervention measures & programs long & short term, to address the needs of at-risk students. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 41 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students will receive additional academic services, will be provided with school uniforms, and be targeted for recruitment into the afterschool program. Additionally, the part-time family worker will provide targeted supports to families in temporary housing to connect them to additional services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified, we will: ● Increase the teachers’ awareness level & expertise using different sources of student data available to them ● Common planning time is deliberately structured to result in improved instruction & all students engaged in challenging academic tasks. ● Have continuous meeting amongst teachers, data specialist & administration to examine students’ data & design instructional plans addressing students’ needs & strengths. ● Maintain & support collaboration amongst all teachers including ESL & Special Education teachers by subject during departmental meetings to intensify student achievement. ● Focus professional development strategically to address specific topics where students need extra attention as identified by data from in-house/school wide assessments. ● Formal & informal observations will ensure that the vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based structured professional collaborations that have strengthened teachers’ instructional capacity including CCLS integration ● Feedback to teachers accurately captures strengths, challenges & next steps using a research-based common teaching framework that articulates clear expectations for teacher practice, supports teacher development & aligns with professional goals for teachers. ● Teacher Leadership grant will allow experienced teachers provide peer support to teachers to build their practice based on feedback & coaching conversations. ● Data Specialist is part of the instructional cabinet & meet periodically to assess the progress towards attaining school goals & individual teacher professional growth. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  ● On site PD will be available to provide teachers with varying instructional strategies. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development component involves the integration of technology & using the professional development team to strategically plan for effective delivery. Our teachers participate in programs such as the Teacher Leadership Program, Teacher Incentive Fund grant & Bridging the Gap program. All of these programs involve teachers taking on leadership roles & they all provide strategies for communication with colleagues, sharing information, intervisitation , protocols for meetings etc. Their efforts supported by administration & accepted by their colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will be part of the MOSL committee and consult with the selection of assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 269,410 0 0 12,366.00 0 2,346,915 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 349 – The School of Math, Science & Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. I.S. 349 – The School of Math, Science & Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  Develop strong parental involvement through the implementation of incentive trips for families to improve student attendance. The trips will take place at various locations.  Update the existing signage for the school to create a more welcoming environment for families. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  School-Parent Compact ( SPC ) School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 349 – The School of Math, Science & Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act ( ESSA ) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S. 349's Title III Program for English Language Learners will provide students with supplemental instruction during a Saturday Program. Programs will all target ELLs (grades 6-8) in groups based upon student performance levels on the NYSESLAT Spring 2018 exam. The program will provide instruction in both Math and ELA to improve student achievement through the NETA and CAPP programs. The Newcomers Empowered to Advance Program (NETA) will consist of a program to develop and enhance students' language development, focusing in each language modality (Listening, Speaking, Writing and Reading). Two ELL certified teachers will provide supplemental instruction to students during the months of February thru May. The educational sessions will be scheduled on Saturdays from 9:00 AM to 12:00 PM. Each session will provide one hour of mathematics instruction, one hour of ELA instruction with ENL push-in support and 1 hour of ENL support via a stand alone ENL class. During this period of instruction 3 groups of students will be serviced (one per grade level). The groups will be divided as follows: 20 students for grade 6, 20 students for grade 7, and 20 students for grade 8. There will be a total of 11 sessions from February 16, 2019 to May 2019.There will be 4 teachers servicing our ENL students. One will be certified in ELA, 1 certified in Math, and 2 ENL certified teachers. The students will rotate every 60 minutes from ELA to Math to ENL with an additional ENL push if during the ELA class for added support. Instructional materials will be purchased for this program to support the needs of our ELL students, which will target language development and accelerate students' academic achievement through scaffolding, and tailoring instruction. Programs will include i-Ready, Independent Reading and GoMath. These programs will be distinct from the normal instructional program. The programs purchased will have a wide range of strategies to acquire academic language and will include a phonics component. These materials will be distinct from the daily instructional offerings for students. Programs will be instructed by 4 teachers, as indicated above. Attendance will be maintained by the Assistant Principal in charge of the program. Outreach will occur through mailings and direct phone calls to parents throughout February and an ongoing basis through the school year. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: IS 349 is committed to provide school based professional development in collaboration with support, from the Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) and/or the Center for Supportive 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Part C: Professional Development Schools (CSS) at no cost to the Title III funds, to build the capacity of the school and improve student academic performance of ELLs. Teachers of ELLs will attend professional development sessions focusing on implementing strategies that will create multiple entry points for ELLs, as well as, modifications to curriculum maps and unit plans. Additionally, teachers will meet in grade teams weekly to analyze student work products to make adjustments to instructional practices to improve student learning outcomes. ENL teachers will need coverages as they attend workshops and will be at the cost of the TITLE III funding source. The school has identified a master ELA teacher to serve as an exemplar classroom in providing curricular modifications and instructional best practices for all students. The master teacher will provide an open classroom that demonstrates best practices for teachers, and will participate in a system of intervisitation to share these practices, serving as another opportunity for professional development. This master teacher will also teach and support 6th grade ENL students. The English Language Learner team will work with general/content teachers to refine instructional tasks and embed language objectives in the lesson to amplify the academic and linguistic learning of ELLs and former ELLs with a focus on writing. Professional Development Topics may include: Scoring the NYSESLAT, Teaching Language Through Content Instruction for ELLs, Developing Academic Literacy for ELLs, Integrating Scaffolding Strategies in the Daily Lessons, Integrating Tasks that Support Language Development, and Planning Effective Lessons for ELLs aligned to the CCLS. Teachers will meet for one hour on Saturdays to discuss and track student progress by creating a spreadsheet showing the progress of their student from February 16, 2019 thru May 2019. Teachers will work together by formulating a plan of action to improve student skills. Teachers will work with the administration in change to document minutes and attendance. All documents will be submitted to Principal Pendola and housed in her office (301). Notes will also be inputted into the IS 349 Google drive. D 32 ENL Coordinator Working Group - Session #1: October 10, 2018 Session#2: November 14, 2018 Session #3: December 12, 2018 Session #4: January 30, 2019 Session #5: March 6, 2019 Session #6: June 12, 2019 The ELL coordinator will attend these sessions and gather instructional routines which they will then turn key to the rest of the staff. These instructional routines will focus on strengthening language skills. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: IS 349 will work extensively with parents of ELLs who wish to best support their children's academic success at home to include an ENL focus. ENL and content area teacher will provide monthly workshops to parents and students once a month from February to May to best support practices at home. Parent outreach will be made by our Parent coordinator, schedules sent home, and individual calls will me made to homes of ENL students prior to each session. Parents of ELLs will be invited to different workshops staring from September 2018 to support them in social and educational concerns, such as New Student Orientation for 6th graders, Immigration supports Via the CBO, Native Language Literacy skills, High School Application Process, Support Math and Literacy Skills at Home, NYC School initiatives, Skedula, Analyzing Progress Reports, Understanding the CCLS, and Support our ENL Students at Home. Teacher, administration and the CBO will all work to support the parents of our ENL students with these workshops/meetings. Please note: Parents will be provided with strategies on how to support their children in all academic areas, social and emotional concerns. Workshops will be facilitated by our lead CBO, Center for Supportive Schools, with the work led by Community School Director, Natasha Mir. Workshops will occur on an ongoing basis. Attendance will be maintained through sign-in sheets, and records will be maintained through attendance sheets. Ms. Carmen Hope, Parent Coordinator, will assist with all workshops and notifications. The Bilingual Guidance Counselor and/or Principal Pendola will provide workshops for parents on the High School Admission Process in October and November 2018. Parents are notified in English and the native language of these activities through monthly calendars, newsletters, phone calls home, messages on PupilPath, flyers and e-mail. Workshops include: Incoming 6th Grade Parent and Student Orientation- August 29, 2018 8th Grade Parents and Students High School Works shop- September 15, 2018 Coffee and Questions with the Principal-September 17, 2018 Family Curriculum Night- September 20, 2018 Annual title I Parent Meeting- October 17, 2018 Housing Workshop- December 12, 2018 How to Help your child with Math and Literacy- January 15, 2019 Social Emotional Support Session- January 23, 2019 Know Your Right Immigration Workshop-February 15, 2019 Preparing your Child for the NYSESLAT- March 2019 Preparing your Child for the LOTE exams- April 2019 Ways to Support and Strengthen English Speaking and Writing Skills at Home with your Child-May 2019 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name School of Math, Science & Technology Borough Brooklyn School Number 349 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michael Loughren Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Barbara Burns Teacher/Subject Area Luis Ortiz Teacher/Subject Area Victor Portes Related-Service Provider Shams Momin Superintendent Lillan Druck Assistant Principal Deborah Roberts-Muller Coach type here School Counselor Brigitte Aponte Parent Jeannette Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Carmen Alverio-Hope Field Support Center Staff Member Camilla Holmes Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 297 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83 Total number of ELLs 88 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.63%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 1 0 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Initially, the school analyzes student performance on the NYSELATT to determine student reading levels. Additionally, the school uses a combination of assessments for ELLs, including the NYCDOE Fall and Spring ELL assessments, NYCDOE Performance Assessments in core subjects and teacher created assessments. Additionally, iReady diagnositic assessments are used for formative assessment. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The school has implemented the Data Wise School Improvement process to structure team meetings to ensure that deep-level inquiry is taking place. Additionally, grade team and ELL team meetings are regularly scheduled to take place. Analysis of this formative data takes place during teacher team meetings including grade team and ELL committee meetings, and surfaces effective teaching strategies for ELLs and identifies targeted areas of student need to make modifications to CCLS aligned 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  curricula. Based upon this data, the school will make modifications to student programming to provide additional supports for ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Ready assessments are administered as a benchmark and post-assessment. Success of programs for ELLs are evaluated based upon student progress on benchmark assessments, teacher created assessments and classroom observations to evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of instructional strategies. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data is reviewed periodically in regularly scheduled meetings to assess the effectiveness of interventions. Based upon a review of these interventions, modifications are made to increase the efficacy and move student learning forward. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data is used to provide additional AIS periods for ELL students based upon their needs and provide the necessary supports through a variety of tiered interventions. Additionally, students are recommended for participation in the school's Title III program to provide additional supports. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Assessments utilized to evaluate and inform ELL programs included the NYSELAT, and NYSED exams in ELA and Math. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Findings are disseminated through teacher team meetings, the ELL committee meetings, the instructional cabinet and individual meetings with parents, students and teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Freestanding ENL program instruction is provided for students in multiple formats. Integrated ENL services are provided in either ELA or Social Studies courses. Standalone services are provided by a certified teacher in a separate location. The frequency of these services are determined by NYSELATE performance of the individual student. Students are generally grouped in cohorts in heterogeneous settings of students. Standalone programming for entering and emerging students takes place in a bridged (6th & 7th grade) class setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. Transitional Bilingual English Program Our Transitional Bilingual English (TBE) program services students in a grade 7 & 8 bridge class. The goal of the TBE program is to attain English language proficiency within 3 years. Native language arts literacy, math and social studies are provided in the first language of the student and ESL is infused into the science content. The curriculum is standards based. All programs in the TBE classrooms are aligned to the city curriculum and the Common Core Standards of each content area. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  Our TBE program has a wide range of students, both in terms of proficiency and academic background. It is important to note that about 40% of the students in our TBE program are identified SIFE status. An important part of our work is to reach all of our ELL students at their language proficiency in the L1 and L2 in NLA and ESL. At IS 349 academic instructional services are as important as are our enrichment classes, services are provided before, during and extended time. In addition, IS349 makes a concerted effort to address to social and emotional needs of our SIFE population. IS349 designs programs that helps this population to quickly become part of our school culture and helps them gain confidence as individuals and promotes them as learners in order to achieve their individual goals. Instruction is delivered in two languages; Spanish and English. In the beginning stages of English language development, 60% of content area instructional time is in Spanish for beginner level students and 40% in English. Students will develop their English skills through ESL services and ELA instruction, for advanced students while increasing the ratio towards second language proficiency until the student achieves proficiency and is placed in a monolingual English program. The Bilingual core curriculum content area at IS 349 integrates the following instructional strategies: •Use of both languages during students engagement in which students will use the language of their preference. •Instructional material will be available in both languages •Bilingual Picture Dictionaries, glossaries, text books, multimedia instructional material, manipulative materials •Scaffolding tasks will be an essential part of the instructional delivery, such as Modeling, Bridging, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation and Metacognition. •Unit reviews at the end of each unit are provided in English to reinforce the academic language in the second language. •Print rich environment in both languages: Interactive word walls, instructional charts, and visual aids are displayed throughout each classroom. •Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocal (SIOP) Instructional Model is implemented in the Science content area targeting the seventh and eighth grade ELL population. •Differentiated Instruction: In order to carry out this transitional language model, instruction is differentiated to ensure comprehension for all ELLs of all proficiency levels. . •Academic Intervention Services for SIFE students and others working below grade level, are provided in all areas. The Workshop Model is the mode of instruction within our TBE program. We will be using the Translanguaging approach to implement our curriculum in both ESL and Content area instruction. Language Arts in the Transitional Bilingual Education Program In addition to the bilingual core curriculum content areas, there is a language arts instructional component. This component consists of instruction in Native Language Arts and English as a Second Language. Our ELLs receive: •180 minutes of NLA per week for students enrolled in the TBE program •360 minutes of ESL for Entering and Emerging ELL's •180 minutes of ESL for Expanding ELLs with 180 minutes of ELA. Within the TBE program, explicit ESL is delivered via 360 minutes per week of stand-alone ESL classroom instruction. Students are grouped according to grade; therefore each class is composed of a heterogeneous population of entering, emerging, and expanding ELL's. Class work focuses on reading and listening skills. Writing exercises are focused on specific grammatical features of a given reading assignment. Collaboration with other teachers in the bilingual department brings in appropriate academic language for each content area. Both formal and informal assessments measure student progress towards the goal of proficiency. To ensure ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language, students will be administered all assessments in their native language. Assessments will include all periodic assessments, Math State test and all in-house tests. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  Materials will be printed and used from the Acuity website in their native language to track progress. The ELE is also used to evaluate objectives relating to student progress in native Language Arts. The data will be collected and it will inform our planning for meeting the needs of the diverse ELL population. Instructional Materials Within the TBE program, all classes use Native Language both for textbooks and additional reading material. Included in this list are: •NYC Core Curriculum for Mathematics, Science and Social Studies – materials are provided in both languages to students •Encuentros for the Native Language Arts literacy classes are used across grades; which are complemented by multicultural classroom libraries •Pearson Longman Shining Star Series (ESL) and the Success Maker Program is available in our afterschool program. Further texts are used for whole class instruction and independent reading—particularly in NLA and ESL The use of manipulatives in the TBE program includes: •In Science: microscopes, scales, thermometers, and meter sticks. •In mathematics: blocks, calculators, geometric shape sets, meter sticks, are amongst the variety of tools to make material more comprehensible. •In ESL: Standards based Multimedia materials (DVD’s, Streaming Video, and PowerPoint Presentations) c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school programmer programs all ELL to the mandated number of instructional minutes as per the CR-Part 154 and ELL Policy Reference Guide Entering 360 180 180 Integrated ENL 0 Emerging 360 90 180 Integrated ENL 90 Transitioning 180 0 90 Integrated ENL 90 Expanding 180 0 180 Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area Commnanding 90 0 90 Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is provided by a licensed teacher and assisted by an ENL teacher. Instruction is provided in English. Content area teachers are augmenting language development via iReady a computer based program. ESL teachers strengthen conversational and discussion skills by modeling accountable talk in every classroom. Every student must develop a writing portfolio in all content areas in order to build upon their writing skills. Our TBE Program parallels our general education program, the difference is that we adapt currculum and instruction to address the needs of our students specially looking at the four modalities: Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing. The TBE Program uses the workshop model to present content area to our students and to improve student achievement. There is an emphasis on vocabulary development in answering text-based questions in each content area. TBE Teachers organize their classroom in a variety of groupings. For example: the small group instruction based on available data. Teachers in TBE Programs frequently provide feedback to students in order to help them identifytheir strength and weaknesses and provide 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  them with next steps for improvement. Teachers often use exit slips to further assess students understanding and to adapt upcoming lessons. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are programmed for the 5 periods of NLA. Teachers use formal and informal assessments to evaluate student progress towards the goal of proficiency. Teachers provide feedback and students use rubrics to determine when there is a gap in achievement or learning. On a quarterly basis teachers evaluate student progress and they meet with their parents to discuss possible interventions as a remedy to improve student achievement. They participate in all schoolwide testing program and to ensure that ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language, students will be administered all assessments in their native language. Assessments include all periodic assessments such as Math State Test, and all in-house tests. materials will be printed and used from the Acuity website in their native language to track progress. The ELE is also used to evaluate objectives relating to student progress in the native language arts. The data is collected and it's used to plan for meeting the needs of the diverse ELL population. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction and multiple entry points are afford to all students regardless of their classification. All former ELLs are afforded services up to two years after exiting status. All testing accommodations are given to students as per DOE rules and mandates; such as time and a half and separate location. Plan for SIFE The SIFE population has increased during the last two years and there is an urgency to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program on both push in and pull out services. *Title III After school services that targets special academic needs of SIFE students *Team Teaching *Develop an individualized student needs assessment to identify strengths and weaknesses. *Grade appropriate instructional support materials. *Differentiation of instruction in all areas. *Academic Intervention Services for SIFE students focusing on Literacy and Math componenet during the school day as well as extended hours. Plan for Newcomers Newcomers constitute a large portion of our classes in the TBE program at IS349. When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition. *Pushin/Pullout services *Title III After school services that targets academic needs of new commers. *Team Teaching *Provide additional support in listening skills, including the use of technology in the classroom and listening centers. •Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day. •Encourage student to participate in the Extended Learning Time to target specific modalities and to help students on all levels to familiarize students with format of the NYSESLAT. •Small group Academic Intervention classes in ESL to target language modalities according to their needs. •Home school communication. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  Plan for Long Term ELLs Long terms ELLs are the largest number of Ells across the grades and are evenly placed in both bilingual programs (TBE and ESL). An analysis of their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments suggests that their problem is one of reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves: *Encourage students to participate in the Extended Learning Time Program, to target specific modalities and to help students on all levels to familiarize students with format of the NYSESLAT. *Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs *Ensure the use of the program MYON to meet students' needs at their level of performance in reading and mathematics. *Independent Reading *Genre Studies Literature Circles Plan for Special Needs Students We have ELL's in two self-contained special education classes. Our policy for special needs students includes: *Title III After school services that targets special academic needs of SWD ELLs. *Team Teaching *Pushin/Pull out services *Ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. *Collaboration between the ENL teacher and IEP Teacher. *Monitoring newcomer and SIFE student for possible special needs status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Licensed teachers in self-contained special education classes and other special education staff members will collaborate with content area teachers to deliver instruction in accordance to the goals of individual students IEP's. These professionals major strategy will be differentiated instruction and effective scaffolding in order to support SWD. They will follow the content curriculum as designed by the school, however, the expectations are that they will adapt lessons to meet the needs of individual students and small groups. The SWD ELL's are served using the push-in model. The Licensed ENL teacher services these student in the classroom by Team Teaching with the content area teacher. The ENL teacher uses Q-Tell and Translanguaging methodologies to help students in their acquisition of the new language. They are also served using a pullout model giving them the opportunity of receiving small group instruction, targeting their needs. All SWD ELL students participate in all physical education activities, technology class, and Foreign Language integrated with therest of the school population. I.S. 349's Title III Program for English Language Learners will provide students with supplemental instruction during after school program. They will be using the NETA and CAAP Program which target ELLs/SWD ELLs who scored at the beginning, intermediate and advanced levels on the NYSESLAT on the Spring 2015 exam. ELLs/SWD ELLs scoring at the the lowest third on the State ELA and/or Math Assessments Spring 2015. The program will service students in grades 6, 7 & 8 giving them additional help in test-taking skills, reading, listening and writing. In addtion, teacher will also have resources such as dicitonaries in spanish, encyclopedias and a full equipped library that meets the needs of our ELLs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school is programmed to meet the individual needs of the students. Students have the flexibility based on their IEP and their needs to be mainstreamed in mathematics or ELA. Also, Advanced ELL's can mainstream to an ELA class. In addition, all subject area curricula are aligned with CCLS. Teachers use formative and summative data to plan lessons that provide students multiple entry points, scaffolds and extensions. Our master schedule allows for SWDs flexible programing as specified by their IEPs. When appropriate flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The target intervention programs for ELL's in both ELA, Math and other content ares are as follows: *In ELA and Math the intervention programs available are iReady, Succes Maker, MYON digital reading program and Test Ready which is accessible to all students. *Afterschool Programs: Extended Learning Time school with one hour of additional instruction per day mandated. Title III afterschool program held on Tuesday and Wednesdays for an additional 90 minutes each day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The implementation of the new extended learning model will support consistent learning for all ELLs. Additionally, the formation of structured grade teams driven by cycles of learning will focus on the development of multiple entry points for ELLs and the consistent analysis of data. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. IS349 is a renewal school. All students including ELLs receive a mandated hour of additional instructional time during the Extended Learning Time each school day. During extended time teachers address achievement gaps by increasing the amount of time students are learning. In addition, partnership with community based organization such as "RBSCC Advantage Afterschool Program" offers tailored whole-student supports, including mental health services and after-school programs. All programs are accessible to all students in the building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. •To support ELLs in the area of literacy we are implementing the computer based reading program MYON. This program is customized to students' interest and reading ability. It allows ELLs to access a variety of text, explore topics of interest and new genres. The text is paired with an assessment, so the teacher can track progress and growth of students comprehension skills. Teachers use this supplemental program to support content areas such as Math, ELA, Science, and Social Studies. Books are accessible in english and spanish. •Continue to focus on targeting language development and academic vocabulary across grades and content areas, and creating increase opportunities for meaningful student engagement. •Additional support in listening skills for Newcomers, including increasing the use of technology in the classroom and listening centers. •During the extended day sessions, Identified SIFE students will receive instruction in their native language to strengthen their literacy skills. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  •Ensure the use of the program Success Maker to meet students’ needs at their level of performance in reading and mathematics. •Small group Academic Intervention classes in ESL to target language modalities according to their needs. •Academic Intervention Services for SIFE students and those performing below grade level during the school day as well as extended hours. •After School offered to target specific modalities and to help students on all levels familiarize students with the format of the NYSESLAT. The activities above and additional support offered to our ELL population is focused on the acquisition of language development proficiency and academic progress. Implications for LAP in English Language Arts: In order to increase our students academic achievement, we will use a variety of strategies which include the following: •Ensure licensed personnel use the Danielson Rubric to increase their effectiveness in implementing the Common Core Learning Standards and to deliver instruction as stipulated by the CR Part 154 based on data and individual student needs. •Collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to create a learning community which is knowledgeable and experienced in researched based Instructional Strategies •Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of students in order to create lesson plans that are differenciated and provide the necessary scaffolding strategies. •Increase opportunities for cognitive engagement for all students. •Utilize multiple entry points to address the needs of students based on there proficiency in different modalities. •Ensure that students are partners in the process when identifying strengths and weaknesses and creating goals for improvement. •Encourage teachers to participate on professional development opportunities focusing on Translanguaging strategies for ELL's. •Ensure that the Peer Instructional Literacy Coach works closely with teachers (ELA, ESL and TBE) in developing rigorous instruction and activities to meet the needs of all subgroups including ELL's. •Implement a print rich environment, use of ESL dictionaries and Glossaries in the ELA classrooms. Implications for LAP in Mathematics Content Area: In order to increase our students academic achievement, we will use a variety of strategies which include the following: •Ensure licensed personnel use the Danielson Rubric to increase their effectiveness in implementing the Common Core Learning Standards and to deliver instruction as stipulated by the CR Part 154 based on data and individual student needs. •In the TBE classes, ensure that the CR Part 154 requirements and the Bilingual Content Language Allocation Policy is followed. •Analyze ELLs data to become well-informed about the performance of each ELL in order to make sounded educational decisions. •Provide opportunities for students to negotiate with mathematics academic language, e.g. reading and solving word problems, interactive word wall •Incorporating writing as a component of the mathematics lesson, e.g. journals •Provide opportunities to convey to others problem solving strategies and the justification of their answer •Ensure the identification and analysis of student strength and weakness to drive and differentiated instruction •Collaboration between content area and ESL teachers to map out student specific needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  •Encourage Math teachers to participate in professional development opportunities focusing on ELL instructional needs; such as, Translanguaging strategies and academic vocabulary. •Ensure that Math Peer Instructional Coach works closely with teachers in developing rigorous instruction and activities to meet the needs of all subgroups including ELL's. We have two technology labs and rolling carts to support the needs of our ELL students and provide them with time on task and the use of technology. Our ELLs also utilize the library to invetigate additional resources. We also have additional supplemental material such as Successmaker, Finishline to furtier support the needs of the ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support in Spanish is an integral part of our TBE program. It is delivered in 45 minute periods, five times a week. Additional support is provided twice a week as part of our Extendee Learning Program. In order to meet the needs of our diverse population, and provide the rigorous instruction required by the Common Core Learning Standards, a variety of resources is used. Some of these materials include, but are not limited to the following resources: Textbooks: *Nuevas vistas, Curso 1 y 2, Holt, Rinehart & Winston *Lectura y communicacion, Santillana Anthologies and individual work: *Don Quijote de la Mancha, Ed. Adaptada, Alfaguara *Poema de Mio Cid *Selections of narratives by Esmeralda Santiago, Junot Diaz, Julia Alvarez, Garcia Marquez Additional Resources: *Strategies to Achieve Reading Success and Test Ready *Monolingual and bilingual dicitionaries, thesauruses *Extensive classroom library with informational texts 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. IS349 ensures that all services and resources correspond to the ELL's age and grade level. Our ESL program follows the mandates of the New York State Department of Education. Texts used are leveled; students are afforded scaffolds appropriate for their grade level. Students’ levels are monitored by teachers and instruction is modified as per student need. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There is limited resource sharing. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). IS 349 provides an orientation at the beginning of the school year and at the end of the year to all newly enrolled students including ELLs. During the orientation parents and students are allowed to have access to the school building as a walkthrough to see classrooms during instruction and meet with the teachers to discuss any questions parents might have. In addition, our school conducts a summer transitional program for two weeks in the summer to support students who are coming into sixth grade. During the summer we encourage our ELL's to participate in the Title III Program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language electives offered at IS349 is Foreign Language in Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? IS349 is commited to provide school based professional development in collaboration with network support, and CUNY (NYSEIB Translanguaging Professional Development) support to build the capacity of the school, to improve all academic areas of the target population. During these professional development sessions teachers will be trained to modify instruction for ELL's and SWD's. The administration assures the attendance of ELL personnel (ENL teachers, and bilingual teachers) to monthly OELL and BFSC workshops. In addittion, on Mondays, the school allocates in-house professional development time for all teachers (including ENL teachers and bilingual teachers) to engage in inquiry and instructional practice development, conducted by the Principal, Assistant Principals, . These are some of the proposed topics to be addressed: *CR Part 154 *Stages of First and Second Language Acquisition *ENL through the Content Areas (Math, Science, Social Studeis and Science) *Adapting Materials and Curriculum to meet the Needs of English Language Learners (ELLs) *ELA Standards vs. ENL Standards *Integrating Scaffolding Strategies in the Daily Lessons *Integrating Tasks that Support Language Development *Planning Effective Lessons for ELLs aligned to CCLS. IS 349 opted in the new core curriculum for ELA and mathematics, sponsored by New York City. As part of the ongoing Professional Development all our ELA and Math teachers have attended PD in the implementation of the new curriculum. Teachers were trained in modifying instruction for ELLs and SWDs. In conjunction with the BFSC, identified teachers are trained in ELL methodologies and strategies. Information is turn-keyed during faculty conferences and grade team meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. IS 349 is committed to provide school based professional development in collaboration with support, from the Borough Field Support Center (BFSC) and the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) to build the capacity of the school and improve student academic performance of ELLs. Teachers of ELLs will attend professional development sessions focusing on implementing strategies that will create multiple entry points for ELLs, as well as modifications to curriculum maps and unit plans. Additionally, teachers will meet in grade teams weekly to analyze student work products to make adjustments to instructional practices to improve student learning outcomes. The school has identified a model teacher to serve as an exemplar classroom in providing curricular modifications and instructional best practices for ELLs. The model teacher will provide an open classroom that demonstrates best practices for teachers, and will participate in a system of intervisition to share these practices, serving as another opportunity for 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  professional development. The cost of this activity will include coverages for teachers, and will improve ELL performance by demonstrating the implementation of effective teaching strategies. These professional development practices will support teachers in identifying best practices to further the development of ELLs academic skills. Professional development for those teachers participating in the Title III program weekly on Mondays from 4:00-4:30. PD will consist of strategies turnkeyed by staff from DELLS training. Attendance will be monitored through sign-in sheets. Additionally, student progress will be monitored through math quantile ratings and lexile levels on the i-Ready platform in regularly scheduled administrations. The English Language Learner team will work with general/content teachers to refine instructional tasks and embed language objectives in the lesson to amplify the academic and linguistic learning of ELL's and former ELL's. Professional Development Topics include: Scoring the NYSESLAT, Teaching Language Through Content Instruction for ELLs, Developing Academic Literacy for ELLs, Integrating Scaffolding Strategies in the Daily Lessons, Integrating Tasks that Support Language Develoment, and Planning Effective Lessons for ELLs aligned to the CCLS. The professional development sessions will take place monthly on the first Thursday of each month in 90 minute sessions, November through May for a total of 6 sessions. Attendance will be maintained through sign-in sheets, and records will be maintained through attendance sheets. The tentative schedule will focus on deep dives into each of the Hallmarks identified in the Leading Advanced Literacy Instruction to Promote ELLs' Achievement guide for 4 sessions (November thru February), with the final sessions (March-April) spent on a deep dive PD will be lead by an Assistant Principal, utilizing resources created by the New York City Department of Education such as the Leading Advanced Literacy Instruction to Promote ELLs' Achievement guide. Costs of this program will include per session for teachers and administrators. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school meets with the parent once a year, in quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language devopment progress, their English language proficiency assessments results and language development needs in all content areas. Such meetings are held with qualified interpretor/translator in the language or mode of communcation the parent best understands. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At IS 349 we believe that parental involvement is the key to a child’s success. Our school promotes an open door policy with parents which creates a welcoming environment were parents feel welcomed and comfortable therefore building better communication and trust. Translation services in Spanish are available daily and at monthly meetings and workshops for all parents through our parent coordinator. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is used on an as needed basis by school personnel. IS 349 is dedicated to educating and empowering parents to play an active conscious role in their child’s educational process and to be aware of all the support services available to them in the school and in their community. We offer many opportunities throughout the school year and actively encourage parents to attend monthly school and community meetings; participate in school events, activities and outings; DOE meetings and trainings; become parent leaders by joining school parent committees; attend CBO conducted adult education classes and by conducting in school and outside community based organization referrals to address the needs of the parents, students and their families. IS 349 provides numerous social events to foster a sense of community such as multicultural events, family Urban Advantage trips, family night during which parents are introduced to the staff and they discuss the academic year, expectations, goals and support services. We provide an array of workshops to empower parents through knowledge such as Title III Parent Orientation; workshops for ELA, Math, Students with Disabilities, Common Core Standards, Housing, Legal Services, Immigration, etc 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94  The administration including the guidance counselor and parent coordinator attend all parent involvement activities. At these meetings, parents are informed on all aspects of school life. The major emphasis is to provide parents with an outline if our curriculum and ways that they can become effective partners in the education of the children. In addition, we aquaint them with a variety of community resources by way of various partnerships . Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael Loughren, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: IS349 School DBN: 32K349 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael Loughren Title Principal Madeline Rodriguez Assistant Principal Carmen Alverio-Hope Parent Coordinator Barbara Burns ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jeanette Gonzalez Parent Luis Ortiz Teacher/Subject Area Victor Portes Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Brigitte Aponte School Counselor Lillian Druck Yazmin Torres Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K349 School Name: I.S.349 Superintendent: Lillian Druck The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Alverio-Hope Parent Coordinator Yes Yes (*Primary) Carmen * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our data shows that during the jumpstart orientation in September 89% of the parents of the incoming students spoke spanish. Our written translation needs assessment was conducted in consultation with the principal and PTA president, both of whom expressed anticipated needs for this school year. The fact is that many of our most active parents are those that have the fewest skills in English, and thus access to school information. Given the population of our school 89% hispanic students, and 11% african american, we have an urgent need to make critical information accessible and available to all parents, such as the Quality Review Report, Title I and all DOE initiatives that need to be presented to the parents. As per the RPOB Report generated on September 9, 2016, the preferred language of the parent community is Spanish. We have created a report which is updated regularly with the languages that parents speak by class and grade. This report is filed in the main office room 301. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Haitian Creole Bengali 285 171 n/a 4 61.96 37.17 n/a .87 287 169 n/a 4 62.39 36.74 n/a .63 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly basis Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish Newsletters, calendars, , after-school program information, parent meeting and workshop notices, parent letters, workshop materials and letters from the school leadership team, parent notices and flyers from the parent association Parent and teacher conference announcements and reminders. NYS testing dates Calendar. 4 times a tear School Data reports 2-3 times a year Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent-Teacher Conference Dates: November 29, 2017 and March 6, 2018 All school and DOE calendars are distributed in September with monthly reminders on calendar and month of parent notices Family Night/Parent-Teacher Conference September 26, 2017, and May 9, 2018 Expedited PA Elections September 26, 2017 Parent Association, School Leadership Team Meetings Monthly Parent Workshops 1-2 a month provide interpretation service(s)? Utilize staff members Teachers utilize DOE over the phone translation services Parent Coordinator translates to Spanish Parent Coordinator or other staff member CBO providing workshop or parent coordinator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School messenger auto calls and text messages are translated into Spanish Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff e-mail and memo are sent in September and reminders are sent prior to parent conferences. Attachments include Chancellor Regulation A-663, Language Identification Guide, Translation and Interpretation Request Forms, Over the phone services, Translation and Interpretation Unit information. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In September our parents receive notice of Chancellors A-663, notice that there are Spanish speaking interpreters available daily at the school, parent meeting and workshops. Notice that. Office of Language and Interpretation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100  Services arrangements can be made for over the phone or in person interpretation services in other languages or sign language. I Speak and Free Interpretation cards are posted throughout the building, classrooms and offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During parent meetings (Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Association Meetings, informal parent meetings) surveys/questionnaires will be provided in order to collect relevant information to ensure that adequate services are available. A focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in the school will gather feedback and best practices. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 101 
