2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 23K363 School Name: BROWNSVILLE COLLABORATIVE MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: GREGORY JACKSON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Brownsville Collaborative Middle School 00000 6-8 85 Watkins Street 718-495-1202 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 23K363 718-495-1208 Fax: Gregory Jackson Jr. gjackson2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Gregory Jackson Jr. N/A KeishaMcDonald KeishaMcDonald TBA Ta-TiannaWalthour, Angelina Rodriguez, Richard Lewinski, KaniaMcClam, KhanyaJohnson, Rose Quigley, YaneeceClarke, AlishaDiaz, AmirColes, AmirRobinson, Charles Karim, AnyelyNunez, Franklyn Sterling, JaniyahJohnson Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A CristyGonzalez District Information Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr.Mia TheresaPate Superintendent: 1784 Park Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11212 mpate@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-346-0816 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Gregory Jackson Jr. NA KeishaMcDonald ShaquannaPerkiss Ta-TiannaWalthour KaniaMcClam Cristy Gonzalez NyeshaShade RahdaysiaCummings Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ AP-CSA Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) NafeesaScott TafiyaWilliams Shawn Carter Mr. Diaz ShaleemaBell Jacqueline Pinto Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our vision at Brownsville Collaborative Middle School is to empower Scholars to acquire, demonstrate, articulate and value knowledge and skills that will support them as life long learners to participate in and contribute to the global world and practice the core values of the school: Resilience, Empathy, Advocacy, Collaboration, and Honor. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our mission is to ENABLE ALL LEARNER'S ACCESS to learning through the provisions of:  Differentiated in depth and cohesive learning programs, aligned to year level content and achievement standards aligned to the Common Core State Standards  Hire and nurture highly effective teachers, focused on improving student outcomes through their commitment to ongoing professional development, quality teaching, evidence based practices, coaching, mentoring and collaboration  A quality safe, inclusive, learning environment that is responsive to Scholar voice, with enriching and engaging resources  Opportunities for the entire school community to participate in learning and the decision making process 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School (BCMS) is designed to engage/re-engage middle school Scholars in their education and to promote high levels of student achievement. BCMS does this by not only involving and empowering students in their education, but also fostering in students the intrinsic desire to learn, their sense of connectedness to their school, and their sense of belonging to a productive community. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School's culture is one of high expectations and strong support structures and is centered on collaboration among all members of the school community, including parents and community partners, in order to ensure that students are provided with a supportive and caring environment that promotes and fosters high levels of student achievement. All curricula are rigorous, standards-based, target essential learning and learning progressions, and are embedded with youth development themes; this supports both the academic success and social, emotional, and developmental growth of our students. Technology is infused into academic courses and arts and enrichment education are bridged with academics in order to provide students with a well-rounded and relevant education that supports critical and creative thinking. Another strong layer of student support at Brownsville Collaborative Middle School is our Habits of Mind - Resilience, Empathy, Advocacy, Collaboration, and Honor - making the acronym REACH. These habits of mind are foundational to the school culture and environment. Scholars are supported with internalizing and exhibiting these habits of mind through in a multi-layered system. They anchor the language of the school culture and are embedded in the classroom environment through Scholar management protocols and school policy around classroom management/classroom instruction. School community members and stakeholders (parents, partnerships, etc.) are celebrated for progressing through and/or exhibiting individual and collective habits of mind through recognition at pep rallies, awards ceremonies, and morning Town Hall meetings. Our habits of mind have been instrumental in supporting a safe and respectful school community; they have become the language that Scholars use themselves and the actions that students exhibit. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School partnerships include:  Roads to Success after-school program, a program centered on academic, arts, collaborations and leadership experiences for our scholars.  Victory Arts, an organization that introduces students to and builds talents around various arts, including a  marching band and majorettes. School Data Corp, an organization that supports assessment practices at Brownsville Collaborative Middle School.  The Campus, a Senator Jesse Hamilton initiative, provides our scholars with access to coding through partnerships with Blue 1647 and Digital Girl. The Campus also supports our students mental health through a partnership with Global Trauma Research (GTR). Sensai Jackie instructs our Scholars in Martial Arts.  2018-19 CEP 10   Every morning, Gym Star provides Cross-fit training to Scholars, parents and staff members, from 7- 8 AM.  Chionesu Bakari provides mentoring and social emotional support to all of our Scholars.  Eagle Academy Foundation, mentors a cohort of young men in the 7th grade.  One Brooklyn Engineering Pipeline, a Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams initiative, aimed to prepare our future engineers, through rigorous, hands-on, STEAM instruction.  Google Classroom is an online platform for the school community, which houses our school website, curriculum resources for the teachers, instructional resources for Scholars and parents, as well as links to all Brownsville Collaborative Middle School social media pages, which include: Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Tumbler. IO Education (Skedula) is a platform for parents and Scholars to access current achievement levels.   NYC Together, provides mentoring for young women once a week.  Midnight Basketball, main focus is to provide the entire school community with a safe space to learn, play and collaborate every day until midnight.  Hot Skatez, is at Brownsville Collaborative Middle School every Wednesday evening from 6-8 PM, to engage our entire school community in Skate Night (remedial instruction is provided as needed).  Brownsville Multi-Services (BMS) and Health First, provides health and nutrition education for the school community, through workshops, classroom instruction, guest speakers, community service projects and events.  Teens for Food Justice, built two Hydroponic labs inside of Brownsville Collaborative Middle School, for Scholars to learn and grow fruits and vegetables year round, while making interdisciplinary connections in math, science and humanities. The $500,000 project was funded by Maimonides Medical Center. Solved instructional coaches provides full-day, high-quality, professional development to every classroom teacher twice per week.   Twisted Rootz, provides our entire school community with healthy food options on a daily basis, such as: smoothies, salads, and wraps.  The Culture Builders, supports and delivers professional development for the advisory team on a weekly basis.  The Single Shepherds, supports our Scholars social emotional needs. This year we have three phenomenal  Shepherds, who go above and beyond the call of duty to meet the needs of the "whole child". LERU, supports paraprofessionals and families by building IEP capacity, as well as providing professional development to best meet the needs of our Scholars with disabilities.  Rosetta Stone, is utilized by our Spanish teacher, to provide further access of high-quality language instruction.  College Access-this year our 8th grade Scholars will be attending 30, all expense paid, overnight college tours throughout North East and South East of the country.  Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams, awarded Brownsville Collaborative Middle School with a $2,000,000 grant for a roof top garden. He also awarded BCMS with a $75,000 grant for a state of the art mobile STEAM lab. Senator Jesse Hamilton award Brownsville Collaborative Middle School with a $100, 000 grant to renovate our school gymnasium.  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School is currently projected to have 314 Scholars in September 2018, 145 of whom are boys, and 169 of whom are girls, 30.34% are Hispanic, 65.17% are black, 34 ELL's and 109 students with IEP's. The average daily attendance, as of October 1, 2018, was 90%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 11  In the 2017-2018 school year, we celebrated our 6th year as New York City public school and my first full year as the building leader. We successfully created a culture that insures interactions between school community members, which are respectful. There are structures that position our Scholars to take risks with their learning and feel safe to explore, think critically without fear of negative peer/teacher response. We have developed several on-going events that foster a culture of high expectations for staff and Scholars all connected to College and Career readiness. At Brownsville Collaborative Middle School, we provide handbooks for both the Scholars and the staff. The handbooks were compiled with all stake-holders, and provide clear expectations for everyone. Additionally, according to the June preliminary data on the Item Skills Analysis June Instructional Reports, Cohort 1, out performed New York City by 10% on both the English Language Arts and Mathematics State Exams. One reason we showed so much growth was by strategically analyzing data and targeting Scholars whom were on the "cusp" and providing them with intensive academic intervention in both Mathematics and English Language Arts. We continued to leverage best practices that enabled this growth. Our key areas of focus during the 2016-2017 school year revolved around continuing to increase the literacy and math proficiency of our students for all student populations through rigorous and targeted instruction that meets students where they are and monitors for progress through standards-based assessments. Our focus is on classroom level assessing and checks for understanding (procedural and conceptual) in all lessons, scaffolding content for the various student entry points, and consistent and cohesive pedagogical practices across classrooms to support literacy and math progress. Administration will review student work products and portfolios with teachers weekly to collaboratively identify trends and patterns in student performance. The data will inform feedback and professional development supports for teachers and will also inform implementation/continuation of additional student, parent, school community supports. For the 2017-2018 school year, Brownsville Collaborative Middle School, will continue to build upon its strengths in goal setting, high expectations, and teacher feedback. We will continue and push even more around those practices that enabled the strengths in these areas to continue the successful trajectories. This year, while we will focus on all aspects of the Framework for Great Schools, a special emphasis will be placed upon Rigorous Instruction and Trust, two areas which require particular attention. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K363 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 108 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 91.7% % Reduced Lunch 9.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.9% 30.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.77 10% 50% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 10 10 89.3% 0.0% 35.2% 65.7% 0.0% 2.8% 2 40% 6.5 15.8% 46% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student progress trends at Brownsville Collaborative Middle School, reveal that our students continue to make significant progress yearly on both the ELA and Math state exams. Student performance trends at BCMS reveal that moving students to proficient levels (3 and 4 on the state exam) proves challenging, and thus continues to be an area of focus.Historically, our school receives a large percentage of incoming students who score in the Citywide Lowest Third in ELA and Math. Historical data trends show that each year, approximately 75% of our incoming students score in the citywide lowest third on both ELA and Math state exams. We are prepared for this challenge, as aforementioned we move student progress significantly; however, we now challenge ourselves with moving larger percentages of our student population to proficient levels (3 and 4) on state tests to continue closing the achievement gap. As such, our curriculum next year will support strong academic, content-specific, and day to day vocabulary building through rigorous and scaffolded curricula and ongoing assessments that monitor student progress and performance. Additionally, we are focusing on classroom level assessment practices in an effort to ensure targeted daily assessing of our students through checks for understanding and formative assessments to inform instruction and support student progress and performance. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School's focus on literacy is centered on the Framework for Great Schools. Teachers are teaching and are supported with a rigorous, CCLS-aligned curriculum (GO Math, Passport NY Curriculum in Humanities, I-Science, Nearpod, News ELA/Brain Pop, Think Cerca, IXL for ELA and Math, I-Ready/ Ready NY, Mathletics, Khan Academy, Engage NY/Odell, NYC Blueprints for the Arts, and Physical Education courses) structured and designed to promote and reinforce strong literacy and math recovery and the extension of skills. The focus on school-wide literacy will support both literacy and math progress as teachers will continue to be supported, in a targeted and differentiated way depending upon their needs, around teaching a more rigorous, UDL-embedded and scaffolded curriculum to our students, paying close attention to student groupings, using ongoing assessments to inform instruction, and engaging in professional conversations and professional development centered on increasing the literacy and math achievement of our students. School visits last year revealed that our areas of focus are pedagogy and assessment and our areas of celebration are goal setting, high expectations, and teacher feedback. We will continue best practices that supported these strengths and will address pedagogy and assessment as aforementioned. Additionally, we will continue our work with teacher teams as the lever to move pedagogy to effective levels as evidenced in student outcomes. All support, PD, partnerships, and team meetings focus on literacy and math achievement and pedagogical supports required to move our students to proficient levels in literacy and math. Our instructional model in ELA and Math is a response to the identified needs of our students and staff. We are utilizing a blended learning model with the I-Ready software program, a CCLS-aligned program that moves students through modules of learning at their individual entry points. This program enables teachers to track and monitor 2018-19 CEP 14  student progress and provide targeted interventions and direct teaching in small groups. This program is being utilized in tandem with our ELA and Math curriculum. Our ELL students receive additional push-in language acquisition supports through the Language Power curriculum. Science and Social Studies curriculum follows the NYCDOE Scope and Sequence and is a blend of thematic units, textbooks, and leveled text. Our Arts curriculum follows the NYCDOE Blueprint for the Arts curriculum and Physical Education and Health education is standards-based, with the latter utilizing the Health Smart curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers (100% of teachers of Scholars with special needs) will increase their instructional skills by participating professional development that increase academic rigor by engaging in consistent classroom assessment practices that provide actionable data related to students’ progress and learning needs to support rigorous, scaffolded instruction and feedback to students as measured by classroom observations, Advance, and curriculum and student artifacts. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly professional development to target new teachers in developing comprehensive lesson plans to support Tier 1, 2, and 3 students; to promote rigor, scaffolding, and cognitive engagement Weekly teacher team meetings to identify protocols around assessing student and identify gaps in instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept 2018 to May 2019 Principal, & Assistant Principal Monthly accumulated data will be utilized to inform instruction and develop best practices; engage in professional research-based reading to inform pedagogy inform and modify instruction. The administrative team will conduct monthly instructional audits for pedagogy compliance. Weekly student work reviews with individual teachers and administration to determine student academic progress. Bi-monthly lesson audits and student work audits to monitor and assess evidence of student academic progress Ongoing school-wide assessments (4x yearly) to monitor student progress Quarterly one-to-one data charts/goal setting admin meetings with individual teachers to monitor and support pedagogical practice and student progress SIT Team will meet twice per month to review the schools class structure for ways to provide SWD access to general education classes as appropriate and to implement flexible programming to allow the expansion of the continuum of services. SIT team Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal; AP, Single Shepherds 2018-19 CEP 16 SIT monitor student progress and determine efficacy of intervention and student supports for SWDs, ELLs, students at risk . SIT will review monthly teacher reports and IEP'S to ensure alignment with scholars needs goals and services. Vocational Assessment administered annually by the age of 12 by special education team Parent workshops around the demands of the CCLS and inherent rigor Teachers, parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Clear communication around the performance and progress of students on a regular basis via progress reports and student led conferences monthly Principal, AP, Single Shepherds, Social Worker, PA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Forty percent of families (parents and scholars) by June of 2019 will engage in a series of workshops hosted by Teens for Food Justice in which they learn the basic stages of how to track, measure, observe and grow vegetables from the hydroponic farm lab to a more advanced stage of designing and promoting their own unique farmer's market. The final stages of the project includes marketing, advertising and preparing tasting samples from reinforced instruction at home. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight includes math, science, humanities and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CCLS-aligned curriculum, curriculum planning sessions, school consultant, flexible scheduling, professional development, per diem, substitute coverage for teachers to attend PD, per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a Curriculum audit will be conducted to assess for rigor and scaffolds in lessons/units; student work will be reviewed to assess for evidence of growth around standards. Curriculum and student work products will be 2018-19 CEP 17  mapped to a school-created Rigor Rubric, and the expectation is that 75% of reviewed audit materials meet proficient levels according to the rubric. By the June 2018 audit the expectation raises that number to 85% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Curriculum Audit Template Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our Supportive Environment average from the 2018-2019 Learning Environment Survey was 75%. Social/emotional assessments of students surfaced that the majority of students exhibited healthy expression, confidence in conflict resolution, and the building of positive relationships with peers and adults. Our school culture is anchored in our Habits of Mind – REACH – Resilience, Empathy, Advocacy, Collaboration, Honor. These habits of mind serve as the language of our school and anchors classroom management and student support. Staff is supported with helping students internalize and exhibit our Habits of Mind through professional development. School community members, with students at the center, are recognized and celebrated for exhibiting our Habits of Mind. The Brownsville Collaborative Middle School Honor Roll saw 44% of our students attain Honor Roll status in the 2017-2018 school year. We will continue this culture of high expectations and student support and celebration in the 2018-2019 school year, with a goal of increasing the number of honor role students. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School engages in daily Town Hall meetings/prep rallies to celebrate our school and school culture. We had an extremely successful 2017-2018 year around a positive, respectful, and safe school culture. We have much to celebrate, and will continue to celebrate our school community and school community members at morning community meetings and monthly rallies and ceremonies during the 2018-2019 school year. To continue the learning outside of the classroom, experiential learning trips that continue classroom learning are also embedded in our students' school experience and will continue in the 2018-2019 school year. Scholar clubs are embedded in schedules to further support engagement and connectedness to school. They have voice in selecting the clubs they wish to participate in and through Scholar surveys to identify clubs they'd like to see happen at the school. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School Scholars also participate in the Student Government Association. Scholars in each grade are elected to their respective positions and serves as another vehicle for student voice and participation in school decisions and structures. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School will continue to engage parents/guardians and families through opportunities such as Skate Night, Movie Night, FUNtastic Fairs, Science Fairs, Math Fairs, chaperoning of field trips, Bring Your Parent To School Days, and workshops around DEO initiatives such as Framework for Great Schools, the CCLS, and other workshops based on parent survey responses. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 19  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Based on the feedback from the By June 2019, 75% of Brownsville Collaborative Middle School Scholars will exhibit participation in a culture of learning, aligned with the school’s habits of mind, focused on academic achievement, self-regulation/self-awareness, and collective responsibility of our school community as measured by student and staff surveys, average daily attendance. . 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development with specific focus on social emotional learning that will support teachers with the implementation of strategies being utilized in the classroom to improve student learning outcomes Teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators All teachers will engage in professional learning that supports higher level student engagement via questioning techniques and strategies that elicit a high level of student response to the learning objective using the social emotional learning model. Strategies to identify the social emotional needs was identified and are being address in the following ways-House Model, Kick Board(PBIS) Student Life Committee, (Character Education)Town Hall, Hope Café Single Shepard's, Students January 2019 to June 2019 Teachers Student Administrators CBO's Admin, teachers, students, guidance, parents, partnerships Guidance Counselor, admin Parent workshops will provide social /emotional strategies to bridge the gap between home and school that impact scholars with transitioning from middle to high school. School and parent community September 2018-June 2019 LERU IEP workshops for parents   Wednesday Night Hot Skatez  Culture Builders: Team building for the school Students, Parents September 2018-June 2019 community  Roads to Success: Scholar performances  Victory Arts: Scholar performances  Midnight Basketball: the entire school community will have access to the Hope Campus until 12 AM, 7 days a week  The Farmer's Market: Our Scholars will sell the fruits and vegetables they grow in the hydroponic farm  Gym Starr: provides aerobic instruction to the entire school community at 7 AM, Monday through Friday. 2018-19 CEP 21  Monday Movie Nights: Every Monday night we play a movie classic in our auditorium 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, Brownsville Collaborative Middle School will engage 40% of our families by collaborating with BMS (mental health services), Healthfirst (medical health services), Teens for Food Justice and the parent coordinator to extend partnerships with health and wellness programs, access healthy food (Twisted Rootz) and active lifestyle (GYM STAR) options; and host ten parent workshops (academic grade specific, bullying prevention, college and career readiness, sex and sexuality, support groups for parents, non-English speaking support) that will strengthen family-communities and empower parents to support the social and academic performance of their children. Parent coordinator, parents, teachers, community partners and administration is responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Field trips, curriculum and materials, human resources -Guidance Counselor, schedule adjustments mid-year for clubs, schedule adjustments for Town Hall celebrations, fliers and PowerPoint presentations ; Final funding to be determined Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019– student, parent, and staff survey around school culture February 20178 benchmark – school culture audit mapped to School Culture Rubric. 80% of culture systems at or above proficient levels according to the rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Culture Rubric, surveys and School Quality Snapshot. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school with yearly staff turnaround and many new to the DOE teachers who require support and professional development to move them toward effective classroom and pedagogical practices, we promote and sustain a collaborative culture built on shared practice, ongoing feedback, and research-based strategies and supports to increase pedagogical effectiveness to increase student outcomes. Advance data reveals the trend of teachers needing ongoing support around classroom assessment practices and rigorous and scaffolded instruction. Teacher teams, professional development, and other professional collaborations will have these areas as the focal core. Supporting collaboration and sharing of practice among and between teachers is paramount at BCMS. As such, we have embedded teacher team meetings by department weekly in all teacher schedules and provide opportunities for teacher inter-visitations both within the school and with other schools across the network and district. Teacher Teams serve as a lever to promote and support strong classroom pedagogy and assessment and practices that are rigorous, cohesive, and that increase student achievement. Monday professional development provides another opportunity for teacher collaboration and shared practice. We utilize this time in meaningful and relevant ways and as a response to the needs of our staff. Some sessions are differentiated based on areas of focus, while others are whole staff collaborations. We embed our topics in the Danielson Framework so that PD is streamlined, connected, and supportive of pedagogical growth as evidenced in student outcomes and professional progress. School goals around student support and progress drive all professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will increase their pedagogical effectiveness around the areas of assessment and rigor (cognitive engagement) as evidenced in student work products and the Advance Teacher Evaluation system through participation in weekly teacher team meetings using protocols for looking at student work, professional development, and consultant support. 2018-19 CEP 24 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly teacher team meetings to support collaboration, shared practice, curriculum, assessment, and data practices - departmental by subject area and special education department. Engage in protocols for LaSW and LaTW, creation of common rubrics and assessments, tracking of student progress and performance at targeted points throughout the year – December, March, June Weekly professional development; external professional development tailored and selected based on the needs of staff; Ongoing needs assessment performed via observations, surveys, one to one meetings and inter-visitations Admin and pedagogue collaborative goal setting meetings 3 times yearly Data will be reviewed by teachers, AIS teams, Instructional Coaches and administrator to analyze trends in observations and student data and create action plans as required Teachers PTA will be involved in conversations around trends in pedagogy and teacher areas of celebration and focus Parents Inter visitations – in-house and external – teachers visit other teachers who show effective practice in collaboratively identified growth areas/areas of focus; Instructional Coaches supports and debriefs Teachers One-to-one support meetings with admin BFSC Support to support target populations and sub-populations – support visits and consultant support visits 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, Teachers, Guidance Counselor Parents, Principal, AP,.. teachers Principal, AP, external support providers, 2018-19 CEP 25  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June of 2019, 40% of our families and teachers will engage in various social justice causes, such as gun violence prevention, advocate for advanced Cancer research and promote healthier lifestyle changes. Brownsville Collaborative Middle School will host fun-filled events such as "Family Movie Night" and "Family Skate Night" (every Wednesday) as an additional platform to deepen awareness around social justice projects. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight includes administration, teachers, parents, community programs and parent coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling and scheduling adjustments, UFT Staff Developer, professional publications and articles, instructional resources, curriculum samples, assessment samples, rubric/checklist samples, protocols, surveys, Advance Evaluation system, teacher leaders, technology – GoogleDocs sharepoint Final Funding to be determined Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 – Mid-Year Checkpoint to identify teacher progress - Self-Assessment and Goal Setting meetings with individual teachers. Expectation – 100% of teachers met benchmark progress goals laid out in goal setting meeting June 2018– End of year goal meetings - 100% of teachers will meet end point for each goal set in September/new goals set in January Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Goal Setting Benchmarks Template Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Superintendent school visits over the 2017-2018 year indicated pedagogy and classroom assessment as areas of focus. Areas of celebration: goal setting, high expectations, and teacher feedback. The goal for this year with respect to effective school leadership, in cohesion with other CEP goals, is to increase the effectiveness of administrative practices around classroom level assessing and pedagogy with respect to rigor and scaffolding. The new Principal will develop his leadership skills by building trust within the school community, attending PD sessions, participating in Principal's meetings, working with are coach and the FSC, establishing her own voice, and supporting improved student achievement ceaselessy. She will create a culture of collaboration and transparency in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the school and the increase in student achievement. Student trends in performance reveal that students made significant progress in both ELA and Math state exams and overall class performance as evidenced by increases in classroom averages and an increase in the passing of core subjects. Additionally, each marking period saw large percentages of students making the Honor Roll - with incremental increases in each marking period - 1st - 20%, 2nd - 33%, 3rd - 35%, and 4th - 44%. A school partnership that continued the work of raising literacy levels of our students and that literacy teachers participated in during the 2017-2018 school year is the LDC (Literacy Design Collaborative) program. BCMS applied for and was selected for this program. Literacy teachers met weekly and Skyped with an LDC coach to work on task design and learning progressions for students. This LDC program/partnership will continue into the 2016-2017 school year and will involve more content area teachers as the program and support grows across the school. Additionally, in the continued work toward raising the achievement levels of our students, BCMS applied for and has been selected to participate in the MSQI program and will reap the benefits of an MSQI coach who will meet regularly with admin and teachers to support the success of the program and other MSQI supports. Student achievement trends and schoolwide trends and progress have been previously mentioned on this CEP document and are all the result of strategic systems and structures that are in place to support the growth and progress of students and teachers. To continue moving the successes forward, support-based, non-evaluative observations will occur regularly to assess individual and collective practice and provide actionable feedback to teachers around increased performance as well as the celebration of strengths. The primary focus will be around pedagogy (rigor and scaffolds) and assessment practices (classroom level). Additionally, student work products will be reviewed with teachers weekly to identify progress and to inform professional development based on trends and patterns across classrooms. These non-evaluative, support-based observations/visits will be utilized in addition tot he Advance Evaluation /system to support pedagogical growth/effectiveness and increased student outcomes/achievement to meet achievement goals around progress and performance. 2018-19 CEP 27  We will continue the highly collaborative environment with professional collaborations occurring both formally and informally. Teacher teams will meet weekly to collaborate, share practice, and support one another while engaging in protocols to support pedagogical practice and effectiveness. Teachers at BCMS are highly supportive of one another and welcome their colleagues’ input and suggestions. Professional development will continue on Monday sessions but will be informed by staff needs assessments coupled with identified pedagogical trends across the school. Teachers will further be supported by the MSQI coach and LDC coach. External professional development opportunities will be provided to teachers throuigh the BFSC and other entities. BCMS will continue to promote and sustain a collaborative culture built on shared practice, ongoing feedback, and research-based strategies and supports to increase pedagogical effectiveness to increase student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of teachers will score at proficient levels according to the Data Driven Instruction Rubric around classroom assessment practices after engaging in a series of professional development around data driven instruction. By June 2019, the new principal will have observed all teachers (5 of whom are new to the profession and have not had student teaching) and used the observations to establish a culture of rigorous instruction and expectations as measured by cycles of observations, Advance data. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development time will be used to review assessment practices and calibrate assessment practices across the school during Monday professional learning block Teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 UFT Staff Developer, admin, consultants Weekly teacher team meetings to develop common assessments that are valid and reliable, to analyze assessment results, and to use that data to inform instruction and interventions at the classroom level Ongoing lesson plan audits to assess check for understanding questions, scaffolds, and rigor Weekly student work reviews to identify student performance trends and patterns across classrooms to inform PD and support Quarterly (or more for targeted subgroups) school-wide assessments to track and monitor trends in performance and support interventions and action plans Frequent assessments performed for SWDs, ELLs, and at risk students to more closely track and monitor their progress and support ongoing interventions SWDs, ELLs, at risk students September 2018-June 2019 Administration SIT members’ analyze trends in target populations monthly PA will be involved in conversations around student performance and progress trends PA, parent community September 2018-June 2019 PA, administration, Single Shepherd Monthly progress reports and Remind parent communication system (texting and online access) will provide ongoing communication around individual student progress 2018-19 CEP 29  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with LERU Multi Service Agency, we are coordinating various parent workshops throughout the school year that support our families on three levels. Support involves the social emotional development of scholars. Mental health counseling for families and PTA meetings that are geared towards high parent turn and involvement. BY June 2019 BCMS will have 75% parent participation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Use of per -session for teachers to offer clubs and academic intervention. That Offers personal attention and support is geared towards students specific social-emotional needs. 2. School Wide assembly that ate scheduled on.... 3 Parent meeting will be facilitated to identify specific students needs and appropriate strategies to support students in the school community. 4. Professional development that is scheduled during the chancellors mandatory P.D. time will be facilitated by .... 5. LERU Multi Service led professional development that offers feedback and strategies to support SWD's 6. Single shepherd led professional development to guide teachers on supporting students in crisis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. June 2019– proficiency in all areas of Data Driven Instruction Rubric February 2019 – proficiency in 70% of areas in Data Driven Instruction Rubric Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DDI Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-2018 school year, over 90% of students participated in a collaborative school activity (morning community meeting presentation, town hall/prep rally presentation, performance/assembly) and 65% participated in a community service project. The result of this is a school where learning is valued by all and that students and parents feel connected to, responsible for, and safe and respected within as evidenced in the School Quality Guide. In our ongoing effort to support our students holistically and to create globally conscious students who advocate, interact, and actively participate in bettering their world, BCMS will continue the programs that enable us to do this with and for our school community; these same programs being the ones that promote a safe, respectful, positive, and productive school culture. The vehicle through which we will push the work forward is the BCMS Community Service program, which will continue on both a volunteer and mandatory basis. In our support of students, some of whom may require crisis management on a regular basis, we have proven to be a school where students are provided alternatives and options to behaviors that at times are not appropriate for school. In addition, we support our teachers with understanding adolescents and the community we serve as well as offering parents workshops on adolescent development. We have made such progress around school culture and student supports this year that OORS infractions were at am all time low (1.3 on the VADIR index) and our overall school culture daily was one of safety, respect, positivity, and purpose. Our community service program will be extended in the upcoming year to include parent volunteers and other school community members and stakeholders in addition tot he students themselves. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents, staff, and students will further integrate civic responsibilities represented by our Single Shepherd in collaboration with our PA committee by participation in Community Service projects as measured by 70% of community members participating in projects that support the betterment of our school community. February benchmark will be 50%. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Community Service program – school-based projects All students, staff, parents Tailored accommodations for our special needs children and their families to participate in the community service program SWDs, ELLs, at risk September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 PA support of the community service program and parent outreach PA, parents September 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselor SBST, guidance counselor PA, administration Collaborative projects with all community members’ inputting ideas and suggestions September 2018-June 2019 PA, guidance counselor, admin School community members, community partners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The following community based organizations support the school community: Victory Arts and Roads to Success Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PA committee, scheduling, community service program, community service program publications and materials. Final Budget to be determined. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of BCMS students and teachers will have participated in at least one community service project; 20% of parents will have participated in at least one community service project ; school will score a proficient on the School Culture Rubric Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Community Service Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group After school During the school day One to one Push in Consultations Small group After school During the school day One to one Push in Consultations Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) After implementation of Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention has not shown progress Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) After-school academic support; AIS instruction during the school day Mathematics Review of reading benchmarks Strategic Reading interventions Review of school-wide assessments Strategy groups Attendance records Behavioral and/or social emotional concerns (ongoing) After implementation of Tier 1 and Tier 2 intervention has not shown progress Review of assessments (classroom) Guidance support; attendance outreach After-school academic support; AIS instruction during the school day Previewing and reteaching concepts and skills Review of school-wide assessments Math recovery Attendance records Behavioral and/or emotional concerns 2018-19 CEP 34 Previewing and reteaching concepts and skills Small group During the school day Previewing and reteaching concepts and skills Small group Guidance support Small group Parent outreach One to one During the school day During the school day Science Social Studies Review of student assessments Review of student work Review of student assessments Review of student work Student is exhibiting social/emotional behaviors of concern Student reaches out to staff Peer mediation Parent has contacted the school about known issue/s Referrals for additional services when required Outside referrals when required At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Approximately 14 -Guidance outreach to parents of students in temporary housing 1x monthly, more if the need is present, to provide supports on an on going basis (access to resources, basic supplies, medical or other health information, access, and supports -School supplies and other supplies as identified will be provided to students -Weekly guidance check-ins with individual students Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At Brownsville Collaborative Middle School we aim to attract highly qualified teachers. During the period of time that open market becomes available and vacancies are posted, based on resumes that our school receives, candidates are selected and are invited to the school to take part in a series of interviews. If it is determined that the candidate is a person of interest, the candidate does a demonstration lesson. Where appropriate, students are asked for feedback about the candidate’s teaching. After all candidates are interviewed, the most qualified candidates are selected for open positions. Professional Development is ongoing throughout the year, and all teachers are members of at least one team to support their growth as educators. Teacher teams meet weekly at department meetings to collaborate, discuss best practices, engage in professional readings, and analyze student and teacher work. Teachers also meet in grade teams to discuss trends and strategies across their grade to support student success – academic, social, and emotional. Throughout the year teachers will meet in differentiated study PD groups that are run by their peers and cover such essential educational topics such as: classroom management, classroom environment, and strategies for improving literacy. School partnerhsips and consultants provide additional supports to teachers through coaching (MSQI and LDC) and data practices (School Data Corp). Additionally, teachers self-select in a collaboration with school administration professional goals in relation to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. They are then supported with those goals throughout the year or until new goals are identified. BCMS administration encourages a collaborative and supportive pedagogical staff and is highly collaborative with and supportive of teachers. We brought in a UFT staff developer to serve as a strong teacher instructional support. Additionally, our weekly staff newsletter, the BCMS Bugle, supports ongoing communication and celebration of staff with staff shout outs and recognition. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). BCMS follows a Professional Development plan for teacher and paraprofessionals that was strategically created around our CEP goals, all of which synthesize to increase and support student achievement and their meeting or exceeding of the CCLS. Each session correlates to a DOE identified Danielson Competency and teachers engage in collaboration at all sessions. These sessions are mostly facilitated by school administration in collaboration with our 2018-19 CEP 38  UFT staff developer. Staff who attend external professional development sessions are invited to turnkey what they learned at Monday PDs as well. The AP of BCMS participates in district-led AP study groups each month to support her growth, knowledge base, and effectiveness as an administrator. The principal of BCMS participates in monthly district-led Superintendent Principal Summits that engage district principals in conversations around DOE initiatives, expectations, collaboration around shared goals, and professional growth Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers have opportunities to give input around assessments through their participation in team meetings and other professional collaborations. An assessment committee will identify trends in school-wide assessments and will support the school’s assessment calendar. Professional development occurs monthly for all staff to support strong assessment practices and classroom instruction at BCMS. Differentiated support based on entry level is provided to teachers collectively and individually to support teachers with assessment and feedback practices. The publication How to Give Effective Feedback to your Students by Susan Brookhart supports professional development. 2018-19 CEP 39  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 89,113.00 0 0 0 935,220.00 x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) p. 13, 15, 17, 20, 23 p. 13, 15, 17, 20, 23 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 2018-19 CEP 40   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 23K363, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 23K363 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 23K363, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this pact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 46  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this pact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District School Name Borough select one School Number B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Coach Assistant Principal Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2018-19 CEP 49  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 CEP 50  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 CEP 51  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 52 d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gregory Jackson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 CEP 56  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 57  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 58 
