2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 75K368 P.S. 368 Principal: LAVERNE PETER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P368K 33-7500-01-0368 K-12 70 Tompkins Avenue 718 388 9494 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 75K368 718 302 4481 Fax: Laverne Peter lpeter2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Laverne Peter Mark John Celia Green Mark John NA Mathew Felder NA District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: Klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: Brooklyn 1 FSC: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marie Callaghan Executive Director: 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 First Avenue mcallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 718-941-3152 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Laverne Peter Mark John Ceila Green Mathew Felder DiaRountree Denise John-Vickerie Nadine Remy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diane Haynes Arzie Goodman Sharon Hepburn MamieToole IvetteFlores AnissaBlango NA NA NA Member/UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P368K is to improve and update instructional methods that provide challenging educational experiences for all students. One of the building blocks for this improvement is to foster a positive relationship with our general education counterparts, so that our students will have equity and equal access to educational experiences and partnerships that will commensurate with their abilities. This will enable them to become participants and contributing members of a multicultural society. We are committed to supporting the development and 2018-19 CEP 9  implementation of comprehensive programs that enable students to improve their performance and maximize their potential in environments within our schools and the larger community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P368K is a multi-sited school within District 75 that serves students with emotional disturbance (18 classes) and students with Autistic Spectrum Disorder (19 classes); 3 community based sites and one Day Treatment program. Our school collaborates with the Office of Mental Health (OMH) and P368K provides the educational component. In addition, there is an Intensive Day Treatment (ITD) forty-five program. Our program for students with emotional disturbance is designed for students who demonstrate significant emotional and social difficulties over a prolonged period of time, and often in a variety of settings, which interfere with appropriate performance in the classroom setting. These students require a District 75 special school that provides an intensive instructional management system and intensive supervision and support, in order for them to make progress in mastering the curriculum and meeting promotional standards. P368K provides an instructional program that emphasizes the development of: (a) skills in developing self-control and in improving interactions with others (b) behaviors needed for school adjustment and post school adjustment; (c) academic competencies to meet the promotional standards. P368K provides an instructional program parallel to the mainstream with an emphasis on responsibility training and skills in developing self-control. 100% of students have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs). Additionally, students receive IEP mandated related services such as speech and language, counseling, occupational and physical therapy. For the past twelve years, P368K middle school programs has partnered with Urban Advantage. Urban Advantage is a standards-based partnership designed to improve students' understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public schools and science cultural institutions such as zoos, botanical gardens, museums and scientific centers. Last school year we partnered with Common Threads, a District 14 initiative. Common Threads brings nutrition and healthy cooking to the school for students and their families. Our Saturday Family Cooking classes were a very successful. This school year our school is once again collaborating with New York University; our high school students are taking a Philosophy course on campus on Tuesdays after school until December. Our school partners with Goodwill and TJ Max for our work site opportunities for high school students. 2018-19 CEP 10  Our school has recently been selected to the following pilot programs for the school year: Exercise Buddy Attainment IEP Data Keeper College Access for Middle School 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our program for students with autism spectrum disorder is designed to serve the academic, social, and emotional needs of our students by providing the structure, the organization, and the prompts to promote independence and communication. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Supportive Environment For the past thirteen years, P368 has a implemented the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) with fidelity and success to manage challenging student behaviors. Our school culture has been described as supportive by students, families and staff. We have hosted visits from foreign countries to observe our PBIS best practices. Our school has grown in many ways during the past year. The results of 2016 School Survey revealed that students, parents and teachers agree the 368K is a safe and nurturing environment that has set high expectations for our learners. Our school's expectations, Just Be , Respectful, Safe, Considerate and Responsible, are embedded in our instructional day; , As a result of the PBIS interventions and strategies, 368K was removed from the Persistently Dangerous List in 2015. Our staff has been involved in ongoing re-certification of Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS) to continue to use a common language to deescalate students in crisis. Our instructional focus is to engage our students in socially appropriate experiences in order to decrease the number of major infractions. Collaborative Teachers Teacher Teams (Professional Learning Communities) meet twice per week to review student work, analyze data and review IEPs. School Leaders attend meetings to provide teachers with support and monitor curricula revisions. Bondie protocol is used to look at student work. After meetings, a team member sends emails of meeting agenda and minutes to school leaders and team members. School leaders provide feedback via email and or in person. Teachers attend ongoing professional development provided by the District Office, DOE and outside vendors. Strong Family-Community Ties 2018-19 CEP 11  We have a Parent Association and School Leadership Team (12 members) that meets on Saturdays. Our new Parent Coordinator has developed strong ties with our families and provided parent workshops in which she facilitated in the areas of Understanding IEPs, Transition and family support. Our focus continues to be establishing a culture of learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families. Our school has embraced the Learning Leaders program and four of our parents are certified parent volunteers for our school. In the summer 2016, our school became a Lead2Feed service learning organization. Our students fell in love with the program and the community organizations they supported. This work is now a very vital part of our school. We are focused on increasing resources from the community and develop partnerships businesses and community based organizations. The students indicated that they felt proud to serve others. Our school partnered successfully with the Common Threads organization. Common Threads offered a full year long program of nutrition and healthy eating curriculum to our students. The program is a comprehensive set of wellness programs that includes in-school, teacher lead nutrition classes and after school, chef led classes. The Family Cooking Classes met on Saturdays were focused on getting families cooking together. Common Threads offered nutritious presentations via Parent Workshops. The family Cooking Classes and Parent workshops were popular and well attended. (3.4) Annually, parents attend our school based Resource Fair, Urban Advantage Saturday Field Trips and our school-wide celebrations such as: Family Night with the Harlem Magic Masters, Awards Assemblies, Student Performances and Prom. Rigorous Instruction P368K will be implementing the Next Generations Learning Standard (NGLS) in all subject areas. Across all sites, all curricula are aligned to NGLS and integrate the instructional shifts. Teachers continue to deepen, expand and refine our curriculum maps and units of study to ensure a range of rigorous learning experiences for all of our learners. Our teachers developed lesson plans and designed units of study which includes the essential questions, standards addressed, learning target, and culminating performance tasks. 368K's Brooklyn's Finest Debate Team has competed in the District 75 Debate Championships and earned the First Place trophy for many years. This year our students placed second in the High School Division. This year, two 368K High Students were selected to participate in the Gilder Lehrman Institutes Hamilton Education Program. Each student created a unique piece of performance art and performed on the stage of the Hamilton set prior to the matinee. We continue to participate in the annual District 75 Initiatives such as: Spelling Bee at both elementary and middle school level, Social Studies Fair in which our students did a live telephone interview with Tuskegee Airman Robert Ashby, the District 75 Entrepreneurship Week where our high school students prepared numerous orders of smoothies for district office staff, Festival of the Arts were our students rocked out to The Spinners, and the Isley Brothers on the stage of York College. Our students created a volcano for the STEM Fair, while at the Social Studies Fair our students exhibited projects that show cased women in history. 2018-19 CEP 12  The results of the preliminary 2018 ELA and Math revealed an increase in the number of students who met standard. Our instructional focus is to increase the academic achievement in reading and math for all students. The 2014-15 School Quality Snapshot reveals many positive responses about P368K's strength as a school that improves student learning as outlined in the 6 elements of the Frameworks for Great Schools. This year we are participating in the College Access for All Middle School. Our students will be afforded the opportunity to visit and tour colleges within New York along with student and parent workshops to discuss different college topics. 2018-19 CEP 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K368 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 237 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.1% % Reduced Lunch 10.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 31.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 8.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 81.2% 0.0% 96.2% 57.4% 2.5% 0.4% 6 37% 7.6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-18 Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP) Quality Review Indicators 1.1 Curriculum and 5.1 Monitoring and Revising are Well Developed. Final student results pending. A review of the 2018 preliminary ELA results indicated improvement in the number of students meeting standard criteria. Our students continue to use the strategy RAFFT to improve responses to constructive response questions. The 2018 Item Skills Analysis revealed that in grades 3-5, students need to improve finding the main idea and finding text evidence to support the main idea. In grades 6-8, the students need to improve using text evidence to support arguments Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in reading achievement for students in Grades 3 -8 as evidenced by 3% increase in the mean scale scores as measured by NYS ELA examination for student in standardized assessment. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers; Speech Teachers, Educational Assistants, District Coaches, ENL Coach Administrators Implementation of Common Core Aligned literacy Curriculum with support of the ENL Teacher for identified ESL students. Students in grades K-12 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Standard Assessment: Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA); Expeditionary Learning; Wilson Reading; Performance Coach; Essential Elements for ELA; HMH Collections Provide professional development opportunities for all staff at the district and school levels. Integrate Thinking Maps in Units of Study Create Professional Development Plan for Professional Learning Communities twice per week. Teachers will devote the Professional Learning Communities (PLC) to reviewing and analyzing student work, data and modifying units of study to inform instructional practices. School based professional development Turnkey model is used. Teachers will bring new learning to colleagues. Teachers reflect on Professional Development using Professional Development Reflection Log Schedule Academic Intervention Services three times per week (small group instruction); implement Essential Elements for ELA; Rally!; Fablevision, Myon Students in grades K-12 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Provide Wilson Reading for identified students Implement Middle School After School Initiative (MSAS) Create calendar for Parent Engagement activities Schedule Monthly Parent Support Groups at each site Families, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers; Speech Teachers, Educational Assistants, District Coaches Administrators Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Related Service Providers, School Leaders 2018-19 CEP 16  Schedule parent informational workshops 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage our families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction through workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator and teachers, and district coach supports. September 2018 parents will receive the grading policies and course syllabi from teachers. Monthly parent newsletter published by Parent Coordinator Monthly parent workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator Monthly School Leadership Meetings and distribution of meeting minutes October 2018 Curriculum Day/Night Meet and Greet Fall/Spring Parent Teacher-Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Block Scheduling Content Specialist Departmentalized Instruction ( Middle and High School) Dedicated AIS period 3 times a week Next Generation Instructional Materials and Supplementary Materials Middle School After School Program Common Planning Per Session Hours for Teachers and Paraprofessionals (Vision for School Improvement) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, Data Specialist will monitor students in Grades 3-8 in order to determine an increase reading level as measured by Fountas and Pinnell By the end of February 2019, the Data Specialist will monitor overall lexile reading improvement for students in grades 4-12 as measured by Edperformance Reading to determine of school is on track to meet the annual goal . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas & Pinnell Reading System Edperformance Reading Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P368K has been a PBIS school since 2005. As a result of the solid PBIS structure and interventions, our school was removed from the Potentially Persistently Dangerous (PPD) List in 2017. OORS data for 2016-17 revealed a total of 13 serious infractions; 11 Level 4 and 2 Level 5 as compared to 25 serious infractions; 21 Level 4 and 4 Level 5 as compared to 24 serious incidents in 2015-16. This data illustrates a marked improvement in student behavior. As of May 2016, 40 staff members were trained in TCIS as a response to the 911 Litigation. In addition, 1 staff member was trained in LSCI last school year. Effective June 2017, 34 additional staff members were trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCIS). Additionally, we have 2 trained TCIS Facilitators on staff.  SED Site Visit Report on March 5, 2015 Summary of Student Interviews Findings- ● students feel safe in classrooms, hallways and cafeteria ● students indicated that there is mutual respect among students and between students and staff ● students stated that they know the rules for appropriate behavior and that the rules are enforced consistently by school staff Summary of Staff Interviews Findings ● P368K was a safe and welcoming place for staff and students ● The principal has established and nurtured a strong sense of community that emphasizes positive relationships and celebrating and respecting the varies cultures that constitute the school community ● Staff expressed that student behavior is immediately addressed and does not interfere with teaching learning process Observations of Staff- Student and Student to Student Relationship Findings ● Student behavior patterns were normal socialization activity ● Students stated during the interview that adults help you look at problems in a different way and they talk nice to you 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an improvement in student behaviors as evidenced by 5% decrease in inappropriate student responses to conflict as evidenced by the incident reporting data system as compared to 2017 data. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ongoing implementation of the Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS); Power of Choice behavior management system; Menu of Incentives Staff registration for professional development for Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS/TCI); New training and refresher; Get Ready to Learn (GRTL); Respect for ALL; Gang Awareness Teachers, educational assistants, related service providers Implementation of the Second Step Anti-Bullying Curriculum; lesson sequence based on infraction data. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers; speech teachers; administrators; PBIS Team members PBIS Team meet monthly with members from each site and PBIS External Coach support All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 PBIS Team members Teachers complete Daily Point Sheets; Communication books All staff – staff register for TCIS/TCI Developmentally Disabled course and or school’s TCIS trainer will conduct school based TCIS training Schedule dedicated Second Step Teacher Clinicians, teachers, paraprofessionals collect data Schedule Parent Engagement activities, workshops Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School leaders Parents, teachers, related service providers Schedule School wide assemblies; PBIS Boosters; Parent Teacher Conferences; Curriculum/Family Nights Students, families Sept. 2018-June 2019 School leaders, Unit Coordinators, Art Specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly award assemblies focusing on academic and social skills achievement.. Parents are invited to Annual Review meetings to provide input and to assist in developing strategies for the FBA/BIP. Major annual assemblies, Winterfest, Black History Month and Spring Fling, provide opportunities for students to showcase their talent. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. External Coach PBIS Coach PBIS Team/Monthly Team meetings with representation from all sites. School Store (Menu of incentives) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the Data Specialist will monitor school wide behavior data systems (VADIR, OORS, SWIS) monthly and compare the data to measure if inappropriate behavior is increasing/decreasing as a result of the goal related activities to determine if the school is on track to meet the annual goal. improved student behavior will be measured by monthly review of index and OORS and SWIS reporting systems. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. VADIR Index OORS reporting system SWIS (School Wide Information System) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Pending release of the final ELA performance scores, a review of the 2018 preliminary Math exam results for students in grades 3-8 revealed an increase in the number of students meeting standard. Based on this data, our priority need is to increase math achievement for students in Grades 3-8. 2017-18 Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP) Quality Review Indicators 1.1 Curriculum, 4.2 Teacher Teams and 5.1 Monitoring and Revising are Well Developed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in mathematical achievement as evidenced by a 3% increase in mean scale scores for tested students in Grades 3-8 as measured by NYS Math assessment. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide teachers with opportunities for ongoing professional development and collaboration to strengthen their Math practice during Professional Learning and Professional Learning Communities ; Math in Focus; STEM; Algebra and Geometry; Teacher Effectiveness and other disciplines All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, related service providers, ESL provider, educational assistants, administrators Create Professional Development Plan for Professional Learning Communities twice per week. Teachers will devote the Professional Learning Communities (PLC) reviewing and analyzing student data to inform instructional practices. and modifying units of study. School based professional development is is the turnkey model. Teachers will bring new learning to colleagues. Teachers reflect on Professional Development using Professional Development Reflection Log External Coaches Program Block Scheduling and Departmentalized Instruction (MS/HS) Schedule dedicated AIS period daily – Six week cycles of targeted skills in ELA and Math based on skills item analysis Schedule small group instruction for identified students Program Middle School After School (MSAS) activities Conduct Parent Surveys – PBIS and School Survey Create activities for Family/Curriculum Night Inform parents Parent-Teacher Conferences Conduct Tripod Student Survey Students, teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, educational assistants, administrators, unit Coordinators Families, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinators, School leaders 2018-19 CEP 24  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. October- Meet and Greet where families come in and meet teachers, counselors and administration to discuss the curriculum and instructional strategies that will be used with students. November- Teacher/Parent Conferences opportunity for teachers/counselors and parents to discuss student progress and supports needed. March- Teacher/Parent Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Academic Intervention consumable materials Technology Dedicated AIS Period 3X per week Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the Data Specialist will monitor school wide math data as measured by edperformance periodic assessment and compare with the baseline data to determine if math achievement is increasing/decreasing as a result of goal related activities to determine if the school in on track to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ed performance Math- Scantron Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● A comparison of Reading Baseline and Midyear Scantron edperformance results for students in grades 3-8, revealed 56% of students showed scale score growth. The 2017-18 Advance Observation Dashboard indicates: 8% Highly Effective, 84% Effective, 7% Developing and 1 % Ineffective. ● 2016-17 Advance Observation Dashboard results revealed for the Domain Instruction : Component 3b: 80% of the teachers were in the Effective range for using of questioning and discussion techniques Component 3c: 83% of the teachers were in the Effective range for engaging students in learning Component 3d: 85% of the teachers were in the Effective range for using assessment in instruction Our priority focus for teacher practice is component for questioning and discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will continue to improve teacher practice by developing a shared understanding of instructional excellence by deepening the school community’s comprehension of Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching as evidenced by a 3% increase of Component 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders use Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 School leaders Create Monthly Observation schedule Share observation trend data for components with teachers Approve registrations for teachers to attend District level professional development and other professional development for improving teacher practice Create professional development plan in collaboration with teachers Schedule six week cycles of Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for ELA and Math Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Unit coordinators, teachers, school leaders Families, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School leaders, teachers Progress monitor student performance School Leadership Team and Parent Association meet monthly. Plan and distribute calendar to families for Parent Engagement Activities; Teachers complete Parent Engagement Log Conduct Parent Surveys Provide calendar of Parent Support Groups and Professional Development for parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly SLT meetings where parents and teacher convene to reflect upon curriculum, instructional strategies, and DOE policies and how they impacts student growth. Development of SLT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Ongoing Professional Development in all content areas; District 75 Professional Development System; Differentiated Professional Development for all stakeholders Fund teacher requests for outside professional development Per Session Hours for Teachers and Ed. Assistants (Vision for School Improvement) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019 school leaders will monitor school wide implementation of feedback from two observations related to questioning and discussion to determine if we are on track to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP Score Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Parent engagement has improved in the past two years. Parents are attending school events/activities as evidenced by attendance sheets. 2018 results of the School Survey revealed Based on this data, parent involvement is an area of focus (QR Indicator 3.4 (Proficient) for this school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parental engagement will increase by 5% as evidenced by inviting two (2) community based organizations to partner with our school. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leadership Team and Parent Association meet monthly. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator, school leaders Calendar activities for Parent Engagement Time; Fall Meet and Greet for families, Family Night; Parent Teacher Conferences, School wide assemblies. ● Schedule parent informational workshops; Speech, Parent Support, PBIS, Articulation Process, Graduation, Middle School/HS Application Process, Transition and Family Support Services and Resources, etc. Parents/ Families, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Unit Coordinators, School leaders ● Distribute Newsletters; Registration for CHAMPS Sports Program, Middle School After school Programs and Step Ahead ● Calendar and invite families to School wide assemblies; Winterfest; Black History Month Spring Fling; Monthly Academic and PBIS Awards Assemblies; School Messenger Parents/ Families, students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Unit Coordinators, Parent Coordinator, School leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Puerto Rican Family Institute New York Children's Center Metropolitan Family Services UNIQUE Care Community Services Elmy's Special Services Inc Parent to Parent Common Threads Cooking for Life Family Cooking Classes 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator; Parent-Teacher Association; School Leadership Team; Parent Coordinator Allocation; Annual Parent Resource Fair Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the Parent Coordinator will monitor parent participation at school wide events and compare the data to determine if the school is on track to meet the annual goal as measured by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and Attendance sign in Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Edperformance; Reading Mathematics Edperformance; Math Science End of Unit Tests Social Studies End of Unit Tests At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SWIS, OORS, VADIR data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated reading; word work; interactivewriting; iReady; Performance Coach; First Author; Essential Elements for ELA RAFFTstrategy iReady; Performance Coach; Essential Elements for math; Mathletics SOLVE strategy Repeated reading; word work; interactivewriting; Repeated reading; word work; interactivewriting; Behavior Intervention Plan (FBA); Functional Behavioral Assessment (BIP); Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During the school day; afterschool Small group During the school day; afterschool Small group Small group During the school day; afterschool During the school day; afterschool Individual; small group During the school day; afterschool 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 36 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33 Counseling, linkages with agencies; after school programs; school supplies; adopt-a-student 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) NA NA NA NA NA Column B Section Reference(s) NA NA NA NA NA Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 36  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 37   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 368, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 368 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 39  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 40  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 368K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 41  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 42  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 45  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P368-Star Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 368 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joycelyn Nedd Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katherine Loev Teacher/Subject Area Daine McBrien/ELA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent NA Assistant Principal Janice Rice Coach NA School Counselor Elizabeth Sanson Parent Celia Green Parent Coordinator Cynthia Marmolejos Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 218 2018-19 CEP 46 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.09%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P368K teachers use a variety of assessment tools to measure the early literacy skills and to guide instructional planning for ELLs. They review data from SANDY, FAST, and formative assessment practices to pinpoint areas of need and strategically guide instructional planning that support alternate assessment ELL student learning. Our Standardized Assessment teachers utilize Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA); Expeditionary Learning; Wilson Reading; Performance Coach; Essential Elements for ELA; HMH Collections, Running Records, and a menu of assessments built into the Core Knowledge Curriculum for our K-2. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 47  We evaluate the success of our ENL program by analyzing assessment data: NYSESLAT, NYSAA, SANDI, FAST, NYS Exams, Fountas & Pinnell Reading, Running Records, FAR, and curricular assessments to determine if our ELL students have improved their language skills in four modes of communication: speaking, listening, reading, and writing and demonstrate progress with regard to school AYP. Related service reports also measure growth with individual students in targeted areas. Furthermore, all students have portfolios comprised of work samples and content area teacher assessments that are reflective of progress.After reviewing data, following suggestions from the Quality Review and consulting with teachers, related service providers and parents, instruction is targeted towards increasing independence and students’ funds of knowledge in personal and community domains. However, the NYSESLAT does not reflect accurate proficiency levels of ELLs in alternate assessment. The test is administered in compliance with the NYSED mandates until an alternate assessment ELP has been devised for ELLs in alternate assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During Teacher Team meetings, teachers and related service providers collaborate on reviewing the summative assessment data and students' learning goals in order to identify the content areas and skills that need to be reinforced. The classroom instruction is targeted towards increasing students' learning through determining the tools and type of intervention (AIS) in accordance with the students' individual needs in order to ensure their academic and social growth. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school has an RtI program in place as part of the process to determine if an ELL in grades K-5 is a student with a learning disability in the area of reading. We continue to provide a Response to Intervention (RtI) program within a classroom that includes appropriate Core instruction, screening, increasingly intensive levels of targeted instruction, and progress monitoring. In addition, an Academic Intervention Services (AIS) program is available to our students including ELLs. We use RtI and AIS data to guide our instructional practices for ELL students and to determine if a student responds to scientific, research-based instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Twenty (20) ELL students were administered the NYSESLAT in the spring of 2017. Based on the NYSESLAT results, two (2) of our ELLs are at the Entering Level in the four modalities. Seven (7) ELL students has reached the Emerging Level. The results of seven (7) ELLs were evaluated at the Transitioning Level and three (3) students received the Expanding Level on the test. One (1) of our ELL students reached the Commanding Level. Since the NYSESLAT results do not reflect accurate proficiency levels of ELLs, its results are not fully considered when developing IEP goals and to drive instruction for the ELL students. We share and consider NYSAA, SANDI/FAST, student portfolios and classroom observations data to drive instruction and develop the IEP goals for the ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The NYSESLAT and other types of summative assessment data are disseminated during the Teacher Team/ Professional Learning Communities meetings that take place twice per week to review students' progress and make decisions on instructional adjustments to our programs. In addition, school administration share these findings with the school staff in electronic newsletters (via school website). Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 48  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P368K currently has a Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program in heterogeneous classes via the integrated and standalone models. Integrated ENL is delivered by a certified ENL teacher via co-teaching with a classroom and/or content area (ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies) teacher to build English language skills through content area instruction using ENL strategies/approaches and methodologies. Stand-alone ENL is delivered by a certified ENL teacher and aims at helping ELLs develop English language skills so that they can succeed in core content area courses. b. TBE program. If applicable. P368K currently features ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. P368K currently features ENL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ELL students of P368K are grouped within three consecutive grade levels in 6:1:1, 8:1:1, and 12:1:1 classes; they receive the maximum of ENL instructional minutes possible within the staffing constraints of our multi-sited school organization. The instructional minutes are provided to P368K ELLs by a certified ELL teacher who collaborates daily with the classroom and cluster teachers who consider the level of their English language proficiency (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P368K organization adheres to the NYS CCLS along with the Alternate Assessment Framework Extensions for ELA and Math and AGLIs for Social Studies and Science and strives to deliver content area instruction using approaches that facilitate our ELLs’ academic and language development and help them meet or exceed standards. In Freestanding ENL program, English Language Arts is taught in English using Balanced Literacy, Workshop Model, Block Scheduling, mini-lesson model, etc. and ENL (Total Physical Response, Natural Approach, Direct Method, Communicative Approach, etc.) methodologies. Core Content Areas (Math, Science, and Social Studies) are delivered in English using ENL methodologies and instructional strategies during Core Content Area instruction via Integrated ENL. To ensure core curriculum alignment, careful scheduling and planning between a classroom teacher and the ENL teacher are required. Our school continues to utilize push-in model via Integrated ENL that promotes collaboration between a classroom teacher and the ENL teacher, decreases in-class instruction time loss and student travel time to and from the ENL classroom.The ENL teacher comes into the class on a regular basis to work with ELL students on specific class assignments providing language acquisition and vocabulary support. Also, our school implements Cross Content lesson planning and delivery with Art teachers that ensures content comprehension and fosters language development. 2018-19 CEP 49  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P368K currently features ENL. Our ELL students are evaluated in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, P368K does not have any SIFE students. However, if we have this category of students, we will provide the following instructional support: Get Ready to Learn (GRTL) program;Whole class/small group/individual instruction delivery; Collaboration with the Speech Service Providers, Collaboration with Parents; AIS; Oral/Visual and Auditory Language Development Opportunities: Literacy learning blocks, literacy workstations, audio-books, computer programs; Wilson Reading; SMiLE; Adaptive technology (if needed); Nurturing environments to facilitate language development, Lead2Feed program, etc. All school personnel support students with Social/Emotional Program “Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS)” and Power of Choice behavior management system; equal opportunity to attend after-school program. Newcomers (0-3 years) receive services that include the following: Get Ready to Learn (GRTL) program; Whole class/small group/individual instruction delivery; Collaboration with the Speech Services Provider; Collaboration with Parents; AIS; Oral/Visual and Auditory Language Development Opportunities: SMiLE; Literacy learning blocks, literacy workstations, audio-books, computer programs; Adaptive technology, if needed; Nurturing environments to facilitate language development; Support students with Social/Emotional Program “Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS)” and Power of Choice behavior management system; equal opportunity to attend after-school program. Our instructional program for developing ELLs (4-6years) provides the following support: Get Ready to Learn (GRTL) program; Whole class/small group/individual instruction delivery; Collaboration with the Speech Services Providers; Collaboration with Parents; RtI and AIS in ELA and Math; the learning resources include iReady; Performance Coach; SMiLE; Wilson Reading (systematic phonics and study of word structure); Oral/Visual and Auditory Language Development Opportunities: Literacy learning blocks, literacy workstations, audio-books, computer programs; Adaptive technology, if needed; Nurturing environments to facilitate language development. AIS in Math: Performance Coach; Math in Focus; Brain POP; iReady. Our school supports students with Social-Emotional Programs of “Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS)”; Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP); Functional Behavioral Assessment (FBA); Power of Choice behavior management system. All students are provided an opportunity to attend after-school program. As part of our plan for our Long Term ELLs, they will continue to be served by our licensed ENL teacher. In addition, Long Term ELLs are offered the following programs to improve upon their linguistic and academic skills within the confines of their daily curricular programming: Academic Interventions Services (AIS) in: ELA – Core Knowledge/Wilson Reading (systematic phonics and study of word structure), Structured Method in Language Education( SMiLE - a literacy program for speech-limited and non-verbal students), Brain POP (animated, curriculum-based content), iReady Diagnostic in Reading (sub-skill practice). Math – Performance Coach; Math in Focus – Math Counts; Everyday Math Games (drill exercises aimed primarily at building fact and operation skills), Brain POP (animated, curriculum-based content), iReady Diagnostic (sub-skill practice), Wacky Wednesday Centers Day. Currently, we have one ELL student who reached the proficient/commanding level and tested out of the NYSESLAT. We will provide him instructional support for at least two more years in ELA and/or Core Content Areas via Integrated ENL. 2018-19 CEP 50  (e.g., interactive writing, advanced word work, close reading, etc.) for at least 90 minutes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of P368K use instructional strategies and grade-level materials to provide access of all ELL–SWDs to academic content areas and accelerate their English language development. Our school organization adheres to the NYS CCLS and Alternate Assessment Framework Extensions for planning and delivering instruction to students. This year, our ENL teacher will continue to plan and align her instruction with the NYS Bilingual progressions and Alternate Assessment Framework Extensions. Since our approach to delivering instruction to all students is to make learning fun, we will strive to provide opportunities which are multi-sensory in nature. In order to provide challenging educational experiences that are meaningful and contextual, our ELL students will use grade-level materials that have differentiated tasks to match their cognitive abilities (adapted books, classroom multi-cultural libraries, digital resources), instructional materials that are aligned with the school’s core curriculum, and literature that reflect native languages (Spanish is dominant) to support our ELLs. Native language support is provided where necessary – such as using bilingual dictionaries, native language classroom libraries, technology enrichment resources in the native language (Spanish) are available in our freestanding ENL program. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P368K staff uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. The educators have a clear vision that includes high expectations for ELL students achievement supported by a purposeful plan of action. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. All teachers work in PLCs (Professional Learning Communities). The ENL teacher also participates in meetings alongside the classroom/cluster teachers. Teachers meet weekly with a purpose of reviewing a student work (ELLs-SWD inclusive) and analyzing assessment data in order to make new decisions on adjusting learning goals/tasks and instructional content and strategies so that to make them address students' needs and foster their academic and social performance growth. Students are placed in content classes according to academic ability whenever possible. Students in 4-12 grade/Standardized Assessment population are departmentalized, allowing for greater teacher specialty in the classroom. Teachers use TABs (Teacher Assessment Binders) and SGPs (Student Growth Portfolios) to empower students to take responsibility for their own learning, as they collect, analyze and track data to monitor the alignment of goals to student work and to make instructional decisions for student progress. Our school implements Cross Content lesson planning and delivery of instruction, ie. ELA/Social Studies, Math/Science and everyone with Art. Schedules are designed so that all teachers have an every day AIS period dedicated to small groups of students for explicit skill instruction. This is specifically beneficial to our ELLs. All of the actions described above aim to enable our students, as well as ELL-SWD, achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P368 schedule Academic Intervention Services daily as small group instruction for identified students, including ELLs, who are 2018-19 CEP 51  not achieving proficiency. AIS instruction is delivered via a model of six cycles of targeted skills in ELA and Math based on skills item analysis. As criteria for determining AIS services, P368 serves Edperformance - Reading (Repeated reading; word work; interactive writing; iReady; Performance Coach; First Author; Essential Elements for ELA: Rally!, Fablevision, Brain Power Wellness; RAFFT strategy) and Edperformance - Math (iReady; Performance Coach; Essential Elements for math; Mathletics SOLVE strategy). Additionally, Wilson Reading and SMILE are provided for identified students who struggle basic language skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school year, no new programs will be considered for implementation - the teachers in alternate assessment classes will continue implementing the Attainment Program that will cover all four major content areas of ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school currently features ENL program only. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs that include Common Core Aligned Literacy Curriculum with support of the ENL Teacher, Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA); Expeditionary Learning; Wilson Reading; Performance Coach; Essential Elements for ELA; HMH Collections; CHAMPS, our after school program that takes place three days a week; participation in Lead2Feed service learning organization which is focused on increasing resources from the community and the Common Threads organization (offered a full year long program of nutrition and healthy eating curriculum to our students via Family Cooking Classes and Parent Workshops); Gilder Lehrman Institutes Hamilton Education Program where each student can create a unique piece of performance art and perform on the stage; school/district based Spelling Bees; Social Fairs, etc. The IEP driven services equally available for our ELLs including Speech, Occupational Therapy and Physical Therapy. Additionally, all students are part of the Social Emotional Learning programs such as PBIS, Power of Choice, and school clubs. All P368K teachers consider intensive language development for their ELLs in their instructional decisions. All students will continue to receive English as a New Language service from the ENL teacher, who will be collaborating with classroom teachers to the maximum extent possible. Our instructional decisions will significantly focus on needs of each ELL student to ensure his/her progress in language acquisition. Our ENL program will continue to capitalize on the literacy skills and prior knowledge that our ELLs already have in their primary language. In doing so, we will encourage our ELL students to take risk in all four modalities. We will use multi-sensory, research-based approaches in delivering instruction that proved to be the most beneficial for our ELLs. We will utilize instructional and adaptive technology as well as student-generated materials for teaching and learning. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The use of technology is incorporated to give students instructional support across all content areas. Technology based instructional materials (BrainPop, Flocabulary, Reading A-Z, etc.) will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction for all ELL subgroups. Content teachers and the ENL teacher actively incorporate the technology (SMART Boards, iPads, laptops, software, learning websites) approach in delivering instructions to students as well as in creating a variety of engaging grade-and-age appropriate hands-on materials to be used for differentiated instruction and formative assessment. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2018-19 CEP 52  Native Language support is delivered in our school through setting up classroom libraries that offer a variety of books on multiple levels with the reflection on the students’ diverse backgrounds, their native languages, special needs and strengths of our ELL students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required service support and resources correspond to ages and grades of P368K ELL students. The instructional materials used to aid ELLs are provided in accordance with their age, grade, and proficiency levels. We use the Atainment Curriculum Program in core content areas (ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science) for alternate assessment students and Benchmark content area leveled books for standardized assessment students adapted to correspond to ELL students' age as well as their grade and language performance levels. A wide range of visual and technology support ensures effective delivery of service and use of learning resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P368K shares buildings with other schools at all four school sites, @ 33, @ 120, @ 293, and @ NYCCC. The buildings' common facilities (cafeteria, gym, schoolyard) are used productively via the administrators' successful coordination towards each school's activities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELLs are invited and fully participate in the summer Chapter 683 Program. They receive ENL service from the ENL teacher, and other IEP-driven services from OT, PT, Speech, and Counselor specialists during the Summer Program as well as throughout the whole school year. The home-to-school connection (in the language preferred by the parents/guardians) is provided through the school attendance teacher, pupil payroll secretary, classroom teachers, and IEP related service providers as needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, our school does not offer any language electives to ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, P368K only features ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel (all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff) at 368K will continue their professional growth via attending a series of professional development workshops throughout the year which are provided by DELLSS and/or the District 75 OELL, Speech, Literacy and other offices. The ENL teacher will continue to share newly acquired professional ideas and information regarding teaching ELLs with classroom and content area teachers during the Teacher Team (Professional Learning 2018-19 CEP 53  Community) meetings that will provide additional opportunities for teachers to improve their instructional practice towards ELLs. In addition, the ENL teacher will attend the school based PD sessions held weekly for school personnel: classroom/content teachers and IEP related service providers (OT, PT, Speech, Guidance Counselors). During the PD sessions, the school staff attain and discuss ideas on innovative strategies and techniques that address language acquisition of our students including ELLs. The ENL teacher will keep abreast of the CCLS. She is included in staff trainings and participates in collaborative Teacher Teams called Professional Learning Community (PLC ) who meet to learn how to adapt curriculum with the CCLS. The ENL teacher collaborates with classroom and content teachers on the use of Bilingual Common Core Initiatives and best instructional practicefor ELL students. The ENL teacher attends all faculty-based conferences aimed to inform and support teachers on implementing the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. There are ongoing collaborative PLC (Professional Learning Communities) meetings for classroom, content, and ENL teachers to discuss student progress, case studies and inquiries. During these meetings, discussions evolve around curriculum, differentiating lesson activities and adaptation of curriculum to meet all students’ needs (including ELLs) as they transition from elementary to middle and/or middle to high school. The school site guidance counselors are actively involved in the transitioning process as they help to manage the behavior issues of ELL students. The Professional Development plan for our teachers and personnel will include Jose P. Training conferences and workshops that highlight effective teaching practices by applying the 6 key strategies of teaching a second language that can be utilized in the classroom. Our non-ELL teachers will register for a 10 hour Jose P. Training sessions through District 75 order to fulfill NYS requirement for ENL training. Non-ENL and bilingual teachers will learn the history of the litigation which became the means to providing students with language backgrounds other than English with equal access to learning and will be exposed to theories of first and second language acquisition, ENL methodologies past and present, and will experience hands-on practice in the approaches and strategies used to foster second language acquisition. At the end of the sessions, teachers will receive certificates that will be kept in their teachers’ files at school. In our school, professional development on ELL-specific topics, such as ENL/co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction consists of at least 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ESOL teachers. Teachers reflect on Professional Development using Professional Development Reflection Log. Agendas and attendance for professional development activities are stored in the school office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to parent orientation meetings/workshops and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences, parents/guardians of ELLs will be offered individual meetings to discuss the goals of the ENL program, their child’s language development progress and English language proficiency assessment results, as well as language development needs in core content areas. Individual meetings are conducted by the fully certified ENL teacher at least once a year at three different locations with the help of qualified interpreters/translators if necessary. We will engage all students', including ELLs', families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction through workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator and teachers. 2018-19 CEP 54  In September 2017, parents will receive the grading policies and course syllabi from teachers. Parent Newsletter will be published monthly by Parent Coordinator. School Leadership Meetings will be conducted regularly on a monthly basis. October 2017 Curriculum Day/Night Meet and Greet Fall/Spring Parent Teacher-Conferences All documents and newsletters will be translated to the languages preferred by the parents/guardians of ELLs; interpretation services will be provided as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P368K school leaders and staff strive to maximize parental involvement in our school life through conducting activities that address the needs of parents. With the support of our administration, site coordinators, pupil secretary, and parent coordinator parents are regularly contacted and timely informed about school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities in a language that they can understand to ensure their participation in the child’s education. School staff assists parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities. The hands on workshops help parents to understand their role in their child learning process. Our school conducts parent-teacher conferences each semester and arranges additional meetings at other flexible times to enable parents to participate in the individual discussion of their child achievement. The translation and interpretation services are provided if necessary. Parents are offered instructional materials as well as informed what materials would be helpful to buy and where to buy them. Our school has established the Parent Support Group for children with an Autism Spectrum Disorder. The group of parents meets every month to talk about the needs of our autistic population and creates a plan of actions aimed to help individually with solving problems of academic, social, and behavioral issues. We also have the Eighth Grade Graduation Group whose activities target the matters related to the transition process of our Middle School students to High School. Each site has a Parent Information Center that displays info regarding school based programs available for students such as After School Program as well as out of school opportunities (e.g., Summer Camps). Parents can find information about free workshops and college educational courses they can enroll to for their own educational growth. In the 2017-18 school year, we will engage all students' (including ELLs') families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction through workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator and teachers. In September 2017, parents will receive the grading policies and course syllabi from teachers. Parent Newsletter will be published monthly by Parent Coordinator. School Leadership Meetings will be conducted regularly on a monthly basis. October 2017 Curriculum Day/Night Meet and Greet and Fall/Spring Parent Teacher-Conferences will be in place on the dates of ___________________ by sites. All documents and newsletters will be translated to the languages preferred by the parents/guardians of ELLs; interpretation services will be provided as needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The inPaste response here: 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-19 CEP 56 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joycelyn Nedd, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P368 School DBN: 75K368 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joycelyn Nedd Title Principal Janice Rice Assistant Principal Cynthia Marmolejos Parent Coordinator Katherine Loev ENL/Bilingual Teacher Celia Green Parent Daine McBrien/ELA Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Elizabeth Sanson School Counselor NA NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 09/20/17 NA NA NA 09/20/17 NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 CEP 58 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Star Academy Superintendent: KetlerLouissaint DBN: 75K368 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. Jacqueline Ortega Pupil Accounting Secretary Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An initial determination of the child’s home language is made by the ENL teacher and the school in-take committee while administering Home Language Identification Survey to a parent during the registration process (in case it wasn't done at the SCE/SBST level). The information from the Home Language Identification Surveys and student emergency contact cards is provided to the school pupil accounting secretary who will enter the data into ATS. Home Language Identification Surveys are kept in students’ files at school. We also refer to ATS reports for initial identification of home languages other than English. In addition, the information on parent language needs can be collected directly from parents or guardians during interviews, conferences, and meetings with parents/guardians, IEP meetings, and other school-wide parent activities. The pupil accounting secretary maintains a list of foreign-language speaking homes so that when a school document is distributed, she can ensure that translated versions are provided. 2018-19 CEP 59  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Africaans Bengali Chinese Cantonese Mandarin Haitian Creole English Polish Spanish (American) sign language) Ukrainian 1 5 8 0 0 1 271 2 23 1 2 0.32 1.59 2.55 0 0 0.32 86.31 0.64 7.32 0.32 0.64 1 5 4 2 2 1 271 2 23 1 2 0.32 1.59 1.27 0.64 0.64 0.32 86.31 0.64 7.32 0.32 0.64 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. From the list of parents' preferred languages provided in the chart above, there is no language/s that represent at least a 10% population of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School calendar September 2018 "Welcome" newsletter September 2018 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document will be translated into languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Document will be translated into languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages 2018-19 CEP 60  School curriculum overview October 2018 Parent handbook November 2018 Teacher-parent conference newsletter October 2018, March 2019 other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit Document will be translated into languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit Document will be translated into languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit Document will be translated into languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open House September 2018 Parent-teacher conferences November 2018, March 2019 interpretation service(s)? Parents will be notified in the languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit.. Parents will be contacted in advance in order to secure interpretation services from both in-house and outside services. Parents will be notified in the languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit.. Parents will be contacted in advance in order to secure 2018-19 CEP 61  Annual meetings with the parents of ELLs Ongoing Workshops for parents Ongoing IEP conferences Ongoing District-wide fairs for parents March 2019 interpretation services from both in-house and outside services. Parents will be notified in the languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit.. Parents will be contacted in advance in order to secure interpretation services from both in-house and outside services. Parents will be notified in the languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit.. Parents will be contacted in advance in order to secure interpretation services from both in-house and outside services. Parents will be notified in the languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit.. Parents will be contacted in advance in order to secure interpretation services from both in-house and outside services. Parents will be notified in the languages requested by parents/guardians by bilingual school based staff members. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit.. Parents will be contacted in advance in order to secure interpretation services from both in-house and outside services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of the school emergency, we make sure that all the school's communication strategies to reach the parents/guardians of ELLs are in place. First, we utilize information from the students' emergency cards/blue cards in order to identify parents/guardians of ELLs who speak English and/or languages other than English; next, we make sure the school has staff members who speak these languages. In addition, there is a folder in the main office with the 2018-19 CEP 62  information about languages spoken by the parents/guardians school personnel can utilize. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school administration make sure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663; they distributes language identification guides and "I speak ..." cards to the P368 staff and parents with the information about the Translation and Interpretation Unit services and contact phone numbers on written translation and interpretation, and over-the--phone interpretation services. In addition, on the DOE website there is an archive of pre-translated applications, forms, and templates available for use. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To accomplish the school plan of assistance for our ELLs’ parents, our school’s LAP team will make every effort to help the families of ELLs get aware of their right to receive information: 1. We will assess the language needs of ELLs parents/guardians. 2. We will establish an in-house interpretation unit to provide language assistance to parents speaking languages other than English. 3. We will provide parents access to the Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guides located in the main office along with their children's educational options. 4. We will inform parents of ELLs about their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their native languages and English and instruct them on how to obtain these services in accordance with the Parents' Bill of Rights. 5. We will post Interpretation Notice signs and Safety Plans Procedures near the school entrance in home languages and English telling parents where a copy of such written notification can be obtained. 6. We will translate all necessary documents in a timely manner. 7. We will provide oral interpretation services during parent-teacher conferences, parent meetings, etc. 2018-19 CEP 63  8. We will provide assistance to parents on how to use the NYC DOE web site and other valuable resources. In case languages other than spoken by the school staff are requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the begging and the end of every school year, Parent Coordinator and the Language Access Coordinator distribute the school survey and feedback forms to parents of all students, including parents of ELLs, in order to gather their feedback on the quality and availability of language services. The school leadership team considers parents' needs and concerns in order to upgrade our programs and provide high-quality language services for our students and their families. 2018-19 CEP 64 
