2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 75K369 School Name: P.S. K369 - COY L. COX SCHOOL Principal: MARJORIE DALRYMPLE 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 75K369 K-12 307500013369 Special Education K-12 383 State Street, Brooklyn, NY 11217 718-852-1701 Phone Number: 718-624-6746 Fax: Jennifer Carpenter Jcarpenter@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Marjorie Dalrymple Mark Maliaros ShaughnDolcy Dorothy Collins N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 Louissaint,Ketler Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1502 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Regional FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marie Callahan Executive Director: 400 1st Avenue New York NY 10010 mcallaghan4@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Marjorie Dalrymple Mark Malairos ShaughnDolcy Lorraine Lozito N/A Aaron Noel DamarisAcosta Jane Dally ShanaHayes Noel Cipriani Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shonedelle Harry Member/Parent Lisa Turner Kerri Goldman Member/Guidance Counselor Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview 2018-19 CEP 9  Our school mission is to empower students with diverse needs to realize their full potential by providing them with a strong education, life skills, values and a caring environment. Our aim is always to transition students into the least restrictive environment possible. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P369k is a diverse community of K-12 learners at 12 sites across Brooklyn. Presently, our school serves over 563 students classified with a range of social, emotional and cognitive challenges including, but not limited to: autism spectrum disorders, intellectual and cognitive disabilities and emotional disturbances. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P369k serves students with a wide range of social, emotional and cognitive needs. Each student comes to us with unique and often severe challenges that have negatively impacted their ability to succeed in a general education setting. At this time, approximately fifty percent of our student population has a neuro-atypical diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. These students, ranging in age from K-12, benefit from our highly structured and systematic approach to instruction in and out of the classroom. Further, our school structure allows for small classroom settings in which students can receive the individualized attention and support needed to participate fully in our school community. The remaining fifty percent of our school population is primarily made up of students with a diagnosis of emotion disturbance. While the particulars of this disability vary greatly, these students also benefit from clear, conduct expectations and consistent routines across both classes and grades with the end goal of re-integration into general education settings. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Of particular focus for the 2018-2019 school year is developing students’ social emotional capabilities. Approximately half our our student population is identified as having an emotional disturbance. This diagnosis greatly impacts their educational, social and long term professional progress. These students come to us both lacking the requisite pro-social behaviors necessary to successfully integrate in their communities, but further exhibiting disruptive and potentially unsafe behaviors. To this end our middle school standardized assessment unit will be participating in a pilot program, Resilient Scholars, to integrate a social-emotional curriculum into our programming and instruction. This program is well established and used in the Urban Assembly (UA) charter schools across New York City. They report that some of the short term benefits include: an improvement in pro-social behavior, attitudes about self, others, and school, reduction in problem behaviors, a reduction in emotional distress, an increase in standardized achievement test scores, and an increase in social and emotional skills. Further, UA report some of the long-term benefits for students participating in the Resilient Scholars program including: a 6% increase in high school graduation rates, an 11% increase in college graduation rates, a decrease in clinical mental health disorder(s), less likely to ever be arrested or become involved with the juvenile justice system, and had lower rates of sexually transmitted infections, and pregnancies. Additionally, a mixed team of administrators, coaches and teachers from the middle and high school level will be participating in the Learning Partners Program (LPP). The LPP is designed to promote interschool collaborative learning practices between a triad of schools sharing a common instructional goal. Throughout the course of the academic year, school teams within each group of Learning Partners schools will participate in a series of biweekly school team meetings, monthly inter-visitations, and other related educational development activities. The focus for our triad for the 2018-2019 program year will be around post-secondary transitions and building infrastructure across grades to support this momentous transition. The hope of participation in these programs is to build strong school culture that provides students opportunities to participate in academic and extracurricular activities that teach and/or 2018-19 CEP 10  reinforce the growth and development and further develop positive alternative behaviors to patterns of self-destructive and inappropriate behaviors. In light of the severe social, emotional and cognitive challenges of our student population, we have selected an instructional focus that will best support the needs of our students. Specifically, our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year is on improving student access to less restrictive learning environments through specially designed instruction (SDI). We believe that the implementation of specially designed instruction tailored to the unique learning needs of each child will increase both access and success in less restrictive learning environments for all our students regardless of age or disability. We continue to work toward the shared goal of building trust between parents, students, and educators and fostering a culture of respect for all. Given these points, this year our focus includes improving school-family communication around instructional expectations, activities and events through the introduction of a school website (STRONG FAMILY-COMMUNITY TIES). In addition, we will work to build stronger and more cohesive collaborative practices for teachers around the issue of supporting student transition to less restrictive placements by integrating monthly transition team meetings between all stakeholders (COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS). Furthermore, we will initiate a pilot social-emotional learning program at the middle school level to both directly build student pro-social capacity and development of an improved school culture in which students and staff feel safe, secure and challenged (SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT). We will offer dynamic and cognitively challenging instruction for standardized assessment students in kindergarten to eighth grade with specific focus in the area of mathematics utilizing a blended learning pathway (RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION). Together we expect these goals and initiatives to support student transitions to less restrictive environments (LRE). Specifically, we hope to increase students’ transitions to LRE’s by directly teaching pro-social behaviors (SEL Pilot) and improving our infrastructure in the area of transitions (Learning Partners Program) (EFFECTIVE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP). 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K369 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 639 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 17 School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 87.5% % Reduced Lunch 11.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 30.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 86.1% 0.8% 99.8% 55.7% 5.2% 1.1% 12 58% 8.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To best address the needs of our students with regard to mathematical proficiency we have decided to integrate a multi-year blended learning program. The overall goal of the program is the develop a seamlessly integrated, mastery-based mathematics blended learning program that targets both the present gap in student mathematical understanding and pushes overall numeracy or an overall understanding of the structure of numbers and relationships between numbers. In the first year of implementation, our goal is to build school capacity in the area of blended learning foundations with teachers utilizing an adaptive mathematics curriculum in a supplemental blend combining face-to-face instruction with personalized learning experiences. Over the past several years our summative mathematics performance has been relatively flat with students demonstrating little to no change in their progress on the New York State (NYS) Mathematics exams. In a review of student performance between two years, 2017 and 2018, the administrative cabinet found that student performance declined slightly at the 6th and 7th grade levels and remained the same at the 8th grade level (note: only those students whose primary, mathematics instruction is delivered by P369K, e.g., no inclusion students’ results were included in performance review). Specifically, the cabinet reviewed individual student performance between the aforementioned years and noted the change in student performance level ratings between years. Further, review of the Individual Student Analysis (ISA) report showed that few points were earned in the critical response sections of the mathematics exam, regardless of standard assessed. While error analysis of the actual student exams was not possible for the 2018 NYS assessments, this finding is concerning and the cabinet posits that students struggled to access the varied content and integrated concept proficiency requisite to complete the critical thinking or extended response questions. We further posit that DreamBox mathematics instruction will positively impact student performance by both remediating content deficits and exposing students to varied and diverse mathematical situations that require complex, integrated thinking. During the 2018-19 school year, student Mathematics proficiency will be monitored through analysis of a variety of assessment instruments, including but not limited to: the mathematics baseline, unit assessments and continuous formative assessments through the DreamBox learning program. Dreambox is aligned to the Common Core standards and uses a fully integrated and ongoing assessment to capture the gaps in student understanding. It also remediates to fill these gaps and ensure that learners understand concepts before moving on to new materials in the context of online, game based learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 13  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P369k standardized assessment students in grades 6 to 8 will engage in blended learning activities to support both mathematical inquiry and the development of critical thinking skills through rigorous and engaging mathematics instruction as evidenced by a 2% combined increase in the number of students in grades 3 through 8 successfully achieving a Level 2 or above on their New York State Mathematics Assessments. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A productive classroom is grounded in strong curriculum, aligned the Common Core and instructional shifts that motivates students through challenge and scaffolds personal experiences and learning. Further, good curriculum is the foundation upon which good instruction is built. To this end, we will continue to work Mathematics curricula that are aligned to the Common Core and design coherent instruction that supports student progress. We will use weekly professional learning community meetings to regularly review student performance data in DreamBox and identify trends and modify instruction accordingly. Rigorous Instruction: Standardized assessment students will continue to engage in inquiry based learning with Ready CCLS (middle school level) curricula to support conceptual understanding of mathematics. Further small group work and strong mathematical practice will be emphasized to align to the CCLS Mathematics Practice standards and expectations. Standardized assessment student will utilize the DreamBox Learning adaptive learning program to support conceptual understanding, fluency, reasoning, and problem-solving skills through consistent use of DreamBox (≥ 1 hour per week per student or approximately ≥ five lessons therein). Professional Development through DreamBox Learning (on-demand learning modules available through DreamBox system tailored to individual student and teacher learning needs) to support teachers and administrators in utilizing standards-aligned data to inform classroom instruction, monitor growth and use to ensure effective implementation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Standardized Assessment students, grades 3-8 September '18 to June '19 Teachers, coaches, assistant principals and principal. Standardized Assessment students, grades 3-8 Standardized Assessment students, grades 3-8 September '18 to June '19 Teachers, coaches, assistant principals and principal. September '18 to June '19 Teachers, coaches, assistant principals and principal. Standardized assessment students grades 3-8 September '18 to June '19 Teachers and coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P369k will support families in their understanding of mathematics instructional practices during community outreach (parent teacher conferences , school assemblies, teacher newsletters, etc.) activities throughout the school year 2018-19 CEP 15  (September 2018-June 2019). The key personnel will be administrators, coaches, teachers and related service personnel. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy money for coaches to develop professional learning opportunities for teachers and to purchase a year long DreamBox Learning subscription for identified classes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in students' mathematical proficiency as measured by benchmark assessments and recorded in SchoolNet. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Baseline: Baseline assessments (September 2018) for middle school students & curriculum based assessments for elementary students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P369K must serve both our students’ intellectual needs and their emotional needs for security and consistency by maintaining a safe and orderly environment for all community members. In order to support a culture of mutual trust and positive attitude within the school community we have adopted an open door policy. Staff, students and parents are welcome to interact directly with administration, related service providers, and teachers at any time. Faculty is made available during non-instructional periods for phone calls and emails as well as student-teacher conferences. Parents are invited to collaborate with administration staff, providers and teachers as needed. All staff and administration are made available during the three integral times in a students day; arrival, lunch and dismissal, to support and develop trusting relationships with all students. Organizationally, our school community is strengthened by a consistent behavior modification system. We have developed an effective token economy system that is driven by a school store, student of the month field trips, a stay on green program and leveled point sheets. As a student moves through the organization this consistent support has been successful in clearly defining behavioral expectations for our students. A primary focus of our school program is supporting students in their transition to less restrictive placement options. As a behavior modification program for grades K-12, supporting students in their transition into the greater community is of primary concern for administrators, teachers, students and families alike. To this end, our school uses a variety of positive behavior management strategies and supports. Our standardized assessment students at all grade levels use a Power-of-Choice program that aims to support student behavioral development in the areas of self-control, following directives, remaining in location and completing class work. We have found that the establishment of regular, predictable, positive learning and teaching environments is crucial to student behavioral success. Likewise, we provide regular feedback to students as to present levels through the communication of points at the conclusions of each period and weekly through the earning of levels and incentive activities. Successful classroom management is crucial to student behavioral and academic progress. We have found that our positive behavior support systems have greatly enhanced the school mission to empower students with diverse needs to recognize their full potential by providing them with education, life skills, values and a caring environment as well as the tools to succeed in the greater community. Likewise, our staff of educators strive to nurture the social, emotional, physical, and intellectual development of each individual child. Assistant principals work closely with instructional leads to identify short and long term goals for their respective sites, teachers and students. Through analysis of student academic performance levels (e.g., state and periodic assessments) and behavioral progress (e.g., SWIS and teacher reports), administrative staff works to identify present levels, successes and deficits therein. Progress and concerns are shared with teachers during regular meetings (e.g., PLC, planning, etc.) as teachers have the most powerful, daily impact on students’ lives. These meetings utilize teacher knowledge of students to identify strategies for academic and behavioral growth. One example can be found in cabinet meetings to identify teacher strengths and needs for professional learning opportunities to support their individual and team growth. Specifically, administration leverages individual meetings and small group 2018-19 CEP 17  communication to identify needs and strengths and then communicates this to the greater cabinet and determines effective learning opportunities. During the 2017-18 school year, administrative staff has worked to balance professional development opportunities, communication with families and clerical needs. A review of the School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 by the administrative cabinet identified a series of concerns in the area of Supportive Environment. The percentage students that positively responded to questions assessing their feelings of safety in school were significantly below the city average. Students responses further diverged from their city peers in their positive feelings of classroom behavior observed at the school with a positive response rate of only 72% versus the citywide average of 79%. Also of note, the range of responses was quite broad with the lowest responses at 54%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an 10% increase in middle school students' demonstration of pro-social behaviors as reported in weekly Power of Choice rubrics; thereby creating a safe, orderly and supportive learning environment for all school community members. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establishing Trust: To establish trust between all members of the school community, it is imperative that all students are known and feel valued in their school community. To this end, all staff will be “hands-on” during administrative periods. Specifically, during breakfast, lunch and dismissal, teachers, paraprofessionals, administrators and related service providers will be present to support students in transitions. Further, the school community will work to know all students individually and foster relationships between staff, students and families. Professional Learning: Staff at P369k will engage in a professional learning session in September to re-introduce the existing, school-wide Positive Behavior Intervention Support program, reaffirm expectations for proactive modeling of appropriate behavioral expectations, establish a common language for PBIS within the school community and foster collaboration between all staff members. Conversations will continue in both Professional Learning Community meetings and professional development sessions throughout the year. In prior years, we have seen an increase in pro-social and appropriate behaviors in students with the use of PBIS in our school. With consistent implementation of PBIS, we hope to continue to improve school culture and climate by identifying specific behavioral expectations and implementing them consistently across all sites and grade levels. Finally, staff will engage in training regarding the citywide General Response Protocol to help prepare our school community for different types of responses to emergencies that may occur, including evacuation, shelter-in, and lock-downs. Data Driven Approach: P369k will use OORS data to determine what our strengths and weaknesses are with regards to student behaviors. We will use this data to examine location of occurrences, times of occurrences within the school day, as well as repeat offenders within the school building and schedule additional staff and/or training as necessary. Students September '18 to June '19 Teachers, related service providers, paraprofessionals and administrators Teacher, paraprofessionals, related service providers September '18 to June '19 Coaches and assistant principals. Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers and administrators September '18 to June '19 Administrators and coordinators 2018-19 CEP 19 Utilize Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) training for teachers and paraprofessionals provided by District 75. Teachers, paraprofessionals, deans September '18 to June '19 Administrators Teachers, paraprofessionals, deans Complete Functional Behavior Analysis (FBA) frequency data for students in crisis and create Behavior Analysis Plans (BIP) as needed, using NYC DOE PBIS guidance. Likewise, support acquisition of socially appropriate behaviors for students through individual and small group counseling sessions, as per student IEP mandates. Teachers, counselors September '18 to June '19 Coordinators and administrators Students will be given the opportunity to earn monthly special activities and weekly visits to the school store and clubs as tangible, motivational tools. Students September '18 to June '19 Teachers and coordinators Anecdotal referral sheets will be collected by Deans and analyzed to monitor students’ progress weekly. Students Provide NYS mentors for "at risk" students (e.g., PBIS Tier III students) who are available weekly for one to one interactions based on a relationship building model of mentoring. Mentors will be trained and supervised by the New York State Mentoring Program. Students September '18 to June '19 Teachers, paraprofessionals and deans September '18 to June '19 NYS Office of Children and Family Services and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. P369k will support families in their understanding of school safety through school based (site specific announcements and posters documenting progress and successes) and school community outreach (parent teacher conferences, parent-teacher communication and individual meetings, as needed) activities throughout the school year (September 2018-June 2019). The key personnel will be administrators, coaches, teachers and related service personnel. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilize District 75 professional development opportunities to train staff in TCI. Provide training for Social Emotional Learning (SEL) team, including use of School Connects curriculum and DESSA assessment of student Social Emotional skills, during bi-weekly SEL team meetings. Further support will be provided by both the D75 counseling office and David Adams (Urban Assembly) in the form of trainings and site visits from May 2018 through June 2019. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in middle school students consistently (e.g., more than half of the time each month) earning level 2/3 as measured by the Power of Choice rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Social Emotional Learning team will meet to review a variety of behavioral data including attendance, weekly individual, class and grade level Power of Choice rubric results, and student performance on the DESSA assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 17 students transitioned into an inclusion placement at the end of the 2017-18 and 13 students transitioned into a community school placement for the 2018-19 school year. This represents a significant decrease from the 69 students who transitioned to inclusion at the end of the 2016-17 school year even controlling for the drop in student numbers represented by the transfer of 1 site to another organization. Student placements data for the 2015-2016 school year showed that 29 of 374 students in grades 3 to 8 transitioned to a less restrictive environment (LRE) or 8% of the grades 3 to 8 students. Of this subgroup transitioning to an LRE placement, 38% have moved to community based inclusion schools. Further analysis also identified that 59% of the students transitioning to LRE will be leaving district 75, instead becoming full members of their community schools, respectively. A review of student placements during the 2014-2015 school year indicated that 32 of 355 students in grades 3 to 8 transitioned from a self-contained classroom setting to a less restrictive environment or 9% of the grade 3 to 8 student body. This number is a slight drop from the 2013-2014 school year in which 9.5% of students grades 3 to 8 transitioned to a less restrictive environment. One major change during the 2014-2015 school year was the expansion of community partnerships with neighboring general education schools. Specifically, we added an inclusion, middle school program with MS 8 in Cobble Hill. Despite the overall drop in the percentage of students transitioning to LRE over the past four years, it is important to note the overall success of our school over the past five years in transitioning students to LRE's as compared to our district as a whole. P369K consistently outpaces D75 in supporting students in moving along the continuum of less intensive services (LIS). Specifically, over five and a half years P369K moved nearly 25% of students to less restrictive environments as compared to approximately 20% of District 75 students as a whole (most recent data from Fall 2016). Supporting students in their transition to a less restrictive environment is a priority of our school. We have created a variety of structures and procedures for students to support them in developing the social and emotional proficiency in addition to meeting the requisite academic expectations to function in a LRE. One example of the aforementioned structures has been the school-wide use of a Power of Choice program. This token economy system is utilized in all classrooms regardless of grade level and/or disability and supports students in developing awareness of and agency in their classroom conduct and performance. While the particulars of how the program have been modified to suit the individual needs of students and classes across our organization, the impact has been noteworthy. Nonetheless, teachers and administrators alike voiced concerns regarding communication between stakeholders. Specifically, we hope to improve the consistency of communication regarding both student progress and regression. This year we will work to create clear guidelines for responses to student misbehavior and more effectively integrate outside resources to improve this process. To build upon and improve our transition process and existing infrastructure, we have decided to participate in and been accepted into the NYC DOE Learning Partners Program during. The Learning Partners Program is designed to 2018-19 CEP 22  promote inter-school collaborative learning and leverage the rich reservoir of expertise that already resides within our school communities to improve the educational experience for all New York City students. Using the Framework for Great Schools as a focal lens, the Learning Partners Program matches a host school that exhibits strong practices in a specific learning focus area with two or more partner schools that are interested in strengthening their own practices in that area. A facilitator from within the Learning Partners team is assigned to each group of schools to guide the collaborative process. Throughout the course of the academic year, school teams within each group of Learning Partners schools will participate in a series of biweekly school team meetings, monthly inter-visitations, and other related educational development activities. We have been paired with three other, comparable District 75 schools and selected to focus on supporting students in transitioning, be that at the post-secondary level or moving to less restrictive placements. We expect that this partnership and on-going support will greatly impact our transitions program and support all students in preparing for this necessary process at all levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P369k will work to improve inter-school partnerships by providing students with the instructional and social-emotional supports to foster student achievement in a Less Restrictive Environment as evidenced by a 3% increase in the number of students in grades 3-8 transitioning to less restrictive environments (LRE) and/or changes in IEP programming supports. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Coordinate a committee at each site including teacher(s), counselors, administrators, and related service providers to assess and determine student placement. Students September '18 to June '19 Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, administrators Utilize a rubric to define expected behavior parameters and clear expectations for LRE expectations. Students will utilize "behavior journals" to self assess weekly behavior progress in addition to reviewing Power of Choice points. Communicate expectations, progress and progress monitoring measures to parents during P/T conferences and/or individual IEP meetings. Students, parents. September '18 to June '19 Teachers, counselors and administrators Provide appropriate transition support for students placed in mainstreamed and/or inclusion programs, including parent workshops and professional learning opportunities for general education staff. Continue to support and expand current collaboration opportunities with the general education population. Students, parents and general education teachers at inclusion sites Provide professional development workshops on writing quality SMART goals for students’ IEPs. Teachers Provide professional development sessions to clarify school expectations and procedures for responding to and recording student misbehaviors that involve stakeholder. Teachers, paraprofessionals, deans, counselors, coordinators, administrators. September '18 to June '19 Coaches, related service providers and administrators September '18 to June '19 September '18 to June '19 Coordinators and coaches Coordinators and administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support parents and students in understanding the path to a less restrictive placement during information sessions offered at all sites in tandem with parent teacher conferences, back to school nights and individually at all 2018-19 CEP 24  conferences, as needed throughout the school year (September 2018-June 2019). The key personnel will be administrators, coaches, teachers and related service personnel. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Increase student incentives and rewards to motivate them to behave in a socially appropriate manner. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 5% of students will be meeting LRE progress benchmarks as measured by the Least Restrictive Environment checklist. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student LRE checklist survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Recent research has identified the importance of school leadership in improving outcomes for schools and their students. Among the imperatives gaining attention in recent years is the need to develop school leaders who are capable of exercising more vigilance over instruction and developing an institutional culture that supports effective teaching practices, benefiting all students. Further, stronger cohesion across sites fosters engagement around policies and initiatives by all stakeholders. A recently published literature review titled How Leadership Influences Student Learning examined the links between student achievement and educational leadership practices. Authors Leithwood, Seashore Louis, Anderson, and Wahlstrom (2004) make two important claims. First, "leadership is second only to classroom instruction among all school-related factors that contribute to what students learn at school" (p. 7). Second, "leadership effects are usually largest where and when they are needed most" (p. 7). Without a powerful leader, troubled schools are unlikely to be turned around. The authors stress that "many other factors may contribute to such turnarounds, but leadership is the catalyst" (p. 7). (See Role of Principal Leadership in Improving Student Achievement by The Center for Comprehensive School Reform and Improvement). The authors contend that the most productive leadership practices are in setting school direction, developing people and designing the school overall. In our most recent quality review, a lack of cohesion was identified as a deficit within our organization. Specifically, our rating for Quality Review indicator 5.1 (Evaluate the quality of school level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school) was rated as "developing," indicating that it is an area of relative need within the organization. Additionally, program coherence in the area of "Effective School Leadership" in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide ranged as low as 64% suggesting that we lack coherence across sites. Finally, we found parent response rates to the School Quality Survey for 2017-2018 were only 39%. We aim to improve communication between home and school and hope to greatly increase the number of parents that respond to the upcoming school survey for 2018-2019. To begin to target this area of concern we will be implementing a variety of structures to support improved collaborative practices and cohesion across all twelve sites in our organization. Specifically, we will be holding weekly administrative cabinet meetings, monthly coordinator meetings and implementing several important organization wide initiatives such as Respect For All and Positive Behavior Intervention Systems. We expect that these practices will greatly improve cohesion across various sites. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 26  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P369K will improve cohesion across all school sites by implementing organization wide protocols and policies as measured by a 5% increase in School Coherence in the area of Effective Leadership in the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Initiate monthly administrative cabinet meetings. Develop unit coordinator subgroups (e.g., alternative assessment, standardized assessment, etc.) and initiate monthly meetings to facilitate sharing of current needs and best practices and progress toward implementing school wide initiatives. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assistant principals Unit coordinators September '18 to June '19 September '18 to June '19 Principal Assistant Principals Initiate monthly site visits by unit coordinators to experience site-based initiatives firsthand and discussion possible use across sites. Unit coordinators September '18 to June '19 Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P369k will support families in their understanding of effective school leadership through SLT meetings and follow-up outreach documenting meeting notes and progress made throughout the school year (September 2018-June 2019). The key personnel will be administrators, coaches, teachers and related service personnel. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional coaches, under guidance of administration, will identify necessary stakeholder trainings and facilitate initial meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 28  By February 2019, There will be a 30% increase in the number of administrative and extended cabinet meetings over the 2018-19 school year as measured by meeting agendas and sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, SWIS data, 2018-19 school survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong communication is fundamental to developing a school-home partnership and in building a sense of community between home and school. In these changing times, teachers must to develop and expand their skills in order to maximize effective communication with parents. (Communicating with Parents: Strategies for Teachers in The School Community Journal). Effective communication is essential for building school-family partnerships. It constitutes the foundation for all other forms of family involvement in education. Effective parent-school communications can benefit parents greatly. The manner in which schools communicate and interact with parents affects the extent and quality of parents' home involvement with their children's learning. Parents also benefit from being involved in their children's education by getting ideas from school on how to help and support their children, and by learning more about the school's academic program and how it works. Perhaps most important, parents benefit by becoming more confident about the value of their school involvement. Parents develop a greater appreciation for the important role they play in their children's education. Substantial evidence exists showing that parent involvement significantly benefits students, including raising their academic achievement (A Meta-Analysis of the Relation of Parental Involvement to Urban Elementary School Student Academic Achievement in URBAN EDUCATION, Vol. 40 No. 3, May 2005 237-269). There are other advantages for children when parents become involved — namely, increased motivation for learning, improved behavior, more regular attendance, and a more positive attitude about homework and school in general. There are also benefits for teachers in that parental involvement can free teachers to focus more on the task of teaching children. By having more contact with parents, teachers can learn about students' needs and home environment, which is information they can apply toward better meeting those needs. Parents who are involved tend to have a more positive view of teachers, which results in improved teacher morale (See Building Parent-Teacher Relationships by the American Federation of Teachers). Communication between the school and families is critical; however, the process can be time consuming and delayed. The development of a school website is a proactive tool for facilitating this important school-home communication by providing up-to-date information on school events and expectations. We expect the website will empower parents to work with teachers and better help their kids succeed. Likewise, teachers will be freed to focus on in-class learning, spending less time reacting to questions and concerns over email or by phone. When questions do arise, they'll likely be more informed and constructive. Finally, we hope that students will take more accountability in their own learning. With clear expectations and a supportive team of in-the-know parents and teachers, kids are more likely to perform and do their best work. A review of the School Quality Guide for 2017-2018 by the administrative cabinet identified relative deficits in several areas within Strong Family and Community Ties. Specifically, they found ratings as low as 75% for parent involvement in school. Further, poor and untimely communication between school and families has been an ongoing area for concern discussed at School Leadership Team meetings during the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P369k will work to expand school-community ties by creating school-wide website, initiating a Parent Association and increasing communication with parents as measure by a 5% upward trend in school website page views per month. 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a school-wide website and individual class pages for each teacher. Parents and teachers Provide training for teacher in creation of effective class pages that provide all stakeholders with timely and relevant information. Hiring of Parent Coordinator to support regular and effective communication with families. Teachers Parent Develop a social media strategy and enable remote attendance in school events and workshops. Parents September '18 to June '19 September '18 to June '19 Administrators and technology liaison. Administrators and technology liaison. September '18 to June '19 September '18 to June '19 Parent Coordinator and technology liaison. Parent Coordinator and technology liaison. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Utilize the school-based technology liaison and parent coordinator to design and implement relevant training on provide on-going support to teachers and administrators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, P369K will increase parent communication and attendance in school events by 5% as measure by attendance pages and tracked number of webpage views. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance pages and tracked number of webpage views. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction, One-to One, Tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day Before and after school for our middle school students Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) District 75 placement: -NYSELA2018 exam results. Students earning <2 Perf. Level. will be selected. -Alternate Assessment -Diagnostic and Summative Assessment (SANDI) -Benchmark Assessment (FAST) Review of IEPgoals through quarterly Progress Monitoring reports. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -New York Ready -Flocabulary - Structured Teaching - -Project-Based Learning -UniversalDesign for Learning(UDL) -Picture exchange systems -Assistive Adaptive technology -Activities for Daily Living (ADL) -Structured Methods in Language -UNIQUE Mathematics Placement in D75:NYSMath2018 exam results. Students earning <2Perf. Level. will be selected. -Structured Teaching -UDL -Picture exchange systems Small Group Instruction, One-to One, Tutoring During school day Before and after school for our middle school students 2018-19 CEP 34  -Alternate Assessment -Diagnostic and Summative Assessment (SANDI) -Benchmark Assessment (FAST) Review ofIEPgoals through quarterly Progress Monitoring reports. All students are entitled to additional services. -Assistive Adaptive technology -Math Games -Accessto hands-onmanipulatives -DreamBoxadaptive learning system Brain Pop UNIQUE Small Group Instruction, One-to One, Tutoring All students are entitled to additional services. NYCDOE Passports Curriculum (MS) Small Group Instruction, One-to One, Tutoring Trade books, Science Social Studies During school day Before and after school for our middle school students During school day. Before and after school for our middle school students Primary Sources, Discovery Education, UNIQUE Positive Behavior Intervention Supports At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students are entitled to additional services. Daily Points Sheet During school day. Before and after school for our middle school students 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We have 64 students in temporary housing (including those awaiting foster care placement, doubled-up, in a shelter or other temporary living situation) 2018-19 CEP 36  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. We will provide clothing, toiletries, digital programs for non-verbal students, food pantry, Saturday outreach. Additionally, our parent coordinator works with individual families in temporary housing, as needed, to connect them with shelter based family advocates that can provide further support in identifying available city agencies and resources. as of June 28th 2017. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We received $34,ooo.oo in our allocation. 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have implemented a curriculum team consisting of lead teachers across all sites to select appropriate assessments based on our curricular needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 CEP 39  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  2018-19 CEP 40   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 41  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P 369K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P 369K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 43  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P 369K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 44  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 46  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P369K is a District 75 school serving 539 alternate assessment and standardized assessment students. 87 of these students (16.4%) are English Language Learners (ELLs) with home languages including Spanish, Mandarin, Bengali, Arabic, and Russian.P369K’s 2018-19 program will provide English-language instruction through the culinary arts. We will provide five Saturday-morning instructional sessions between December and February. Each session will be four and a half hours in duration, running from 8:30am to 1:00pm. Eighteen alternate assessment ELLs will be invited to participate. The program will be staffed by two certified ENL teachers, one ADL teacher, and four paraprofessionals. Three paraprofessionals will fulfill students’ instructional mandates, and one additional paraprofessional will serve as 1:1 crisis paraprofessional for a student whose IEP mandates this. The program will be supervised by one assistant principal, who will not be remunerated through Title III funds. P369K’s certified teachers will provide English language instruction. Paraprofessionals fluent in Mandarin, Spanish, and Arabic will provide native-language scaffolding for ELL families. Culinary instruction will be provided by Edwin Mejia, chef and NYC DOE-approved vendor. All participating students and their parents will be invited to attend all five sessions. Session one will focus on nutrition and kitchen safety; session two will focus on selecting and preparing healthy ingredients. During sessions three and four, students and their families will use the skills learned in the previous two sessions to cook healthy meals under the supervision of Chef Edwin. Mr. Ferguson, one of P369K’s certified ENL teachers, has designed an academic, Common Core-aligned culinary curriculum with the aim of building task-specific and generalized functional English skills for students and their families. This language instruction will be provided by Mr. Ferguson, one more certified ENL teacher, and an ADL teacher. The language of instruction will be English.Research supports language instruction through the culinary arts. “[Studies] suggest that nutrition education may improve dietary behaviors and reduce incidence of obesity in elementary students” (Kim & Choi, Korean Journal of Culinary Nutrition).OTPS funds will be used to remunerate our DOE-approved vendor. We will also use these funds to purchase 3 ipads, which teachers will use to record student work during instructional sessions, as well as protective cases for these Ipads. Remaining OTPS funds will be used to purchase the cleaning supplies necessary to run a sanitary kitchen. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP 50  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Two professional development sessions lasting two hours each will take place in December ’18 and January ’19. All staff participating in the Title III program will attend all sessions. All three certified teachers will facilitate both professional development sessions. During these sessions, all staff will learn to implement the curriculum designed by Mr. Ferguson. Mr Ferguson's curriculum will be based on teaching cullinary arts within the special education classroom. Most of the acomodations will be based from adaptations our staff utilizes in the special education classroom. According to Kochhar, West and Taymans in Successful Inclusion (Prentice Hall, 2000) a buddy system will be one of the techniques/topics covered in helping the students complete a cooking task whether small or large. This buddy system will have students paired up to work together on a myriad of topics from mixing ingredients as a team, to seperating ingredients to be used for the recipe. Topics will also include kitchen safety, planning healthy yet economical meals for low-income families, and collaboration with our DOE-approved vendor. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Families of about 24- 28 ELLs (from P67 and 133) will be invited to participate in our Title III program on an ongoing basis. Parental engagement funds will be used to purchase basic kitchen tools (small cutting boards, knives, a mixing bowl, etc.) and ingredients for parents to use during instructional sessions. At the conclusion of the program these materials will be given to families, so that they can implement the skills learned during our instructional program at home. This donation of basic kitchen supplies and staple ingredients will benefit the low-income families participating in our program. These funds will also be used to provide Metro Cards for families. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Budgeted Amount $9,130.56 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction: 3 teachers x 5 sessions x 4.5 hours/session x60.65 = $4,093.88 4 paras x 5 sessions x 4.5 hours/session x $34.73= $,3125.70 DI subtotal $7,219.58 Professional Development 3 teachers x 2 sessions x 2 hours/session x$60.65 =$727.80 4 paras x 2 sessions x 2hours/session x $34.73 = $555.58 1 AP x 2 sessions x 2 hrs/session x $63.45 PD Subtotal $1,537.28 Secretary 2018-19 CEP 51 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 Secretary x 10 sessions x 1 hr/session x $37.37 = $373.70 NYC DOE approved-vendor: $50.00/hr x4 sessions x 4.5hrs/ session = $900.00 128GB Ipad x 3 x $405.00 = $1,215.00 Belkin keyboard Ipad Case x 3 x $96.41= $289..23 Cleaning supplies (sanitary wipes, dish soap, sponges, latex gloves, hand sanitizer) = $68.97 Budgeted Amount OTPS ($2,473.20) Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL _____________ ______________ ________ ____________ Basic Kitchen Supplies x 18 famiies = $360.00 ($20 value per family) Canned & Fresh Ingredients x 18 families= $270.00 ($15 value per family) MetroCards= $132.24 $12,366.00 __________ _Parental Engagement ($762.24) $12,366 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P369K, Coy L. Cox School Borough Brooklyn School Number 369 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marjorie Dalrymple Coach Jenny Carpenter ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lateef Ferguson Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Curry/sped Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Jennifer Gottlieb Superintendent Kettler Louissant Assistant Principal J. Nardone, D.Collins Coach Cynthia Torres School Counselor Christine Swanson Parent Shondell Harry Parent Coordinator Sofia Bugdady Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Eileen Blair C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 656 2018-19 CEP 53 Total number of ELLs 73 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.13%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P369K uses the Santillana english series for ongoing assessment of the literacy and verbal communication skills of our ELL's. Using this data, we provide differentiated instruction based on the individual needs of students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All Santillana materials are accessibly organized and stored at the main site. In-school instructional coaches Jennifer Carpenter and Eileen Blair ensure that ENL teachers are proficient in the administration of ongoing assessment. Assessment data is recorded by ENL teacher Lateef Ferguson. Application of this data to future instruction and assessment is discussed in regular meetings with instructional coaches. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 54  ELL performance baseline, progress, and areas of need are evaluated through test scores (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT), classroom performance, and Dolch literacy assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? P369K's ENL teacher, Lateef Ferguson, gathers data from summative assessments; this allows him to create and apply curricular materials based on areas of student need. Mr. Ferguson discusses the assessment data and his plans for intervention with instructional coaches Eileen Blair and Jennifer Carpenter. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Data drives instruction, and is used to determine the criteria of the RTL framework for grades K-5. Our School Primary uses data derived form State tests (NYSITELL and NYSELAT) to directly and accurately plan which subjects the ENL teacher would provide stand alone or Integrated service based on the students score within an aspect (Reading,Writing,Listening,) The ENL teacher will develop a plan where students will directly receive the most appropriate service that will best help benefit the student,which would derive from the data gathered. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and other standardized tests such as the ELA test. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Email and meetings with administration and instructional coaches. In addition, our ENL teachers, when asked, attend students IEP meetings to help with making adjustments to aspects of a students' instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered in integrated and stand-alone settings. Program models are ungraded, but all students in ENL groups fall within three contiguous grades of each other. Instructional groups are generally heterogeneous in proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginning and intermediate ELL students in grades K-8 receive two units of ENL; advanced students receive one unit of ENL. High school students at the beginner level receive three units of ESL; intermediate level ELLs receive two units; Advanced ELLs receive 180 minutes as per CR Part 154 mandates. P369K deliveres ENL instruction using the integrated/stand-alone model, At 2018-19 CEP 55  this point, P369K does not have enough ENL staff to ensure that each student receives their total mandated minutes of instruction; P369K will addresss this by hiring 2 new ENL teachers in the 2017-18 school year. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. P369K uses the stand-alone/integrated model to delivered instruction in English. To ensure that the students develop academically, meet the demands of the CCLS, and pass the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction incorporates ESL strategies such as: The Cognitive Academic Language Approach (CALLA), Total Physical Approach (TPR), Language Experience, Graphic Organizers, Cooperative Learning, and Technology. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The home languages of incoming students are determined by the LPT during the intake procedure using parent interviews and the HLIS. Incoming ELL's are given the NYSITELL or Spanish LAB as a means of determining their English language proficiency. They are evaluated in their native languages throughout the year by alternate placement paraprofessionals. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE students are acclimated to the P369K environment through the use of social programs/classes run by the social studies teacher, Mr. Feintstein; and they are encouraged to participate in Title III after-school programs; ENL teacher Mr. Ferguson introduces them not only to the English language, but to the American academic environment. B. Mr. Ferguson will focus on each student’s strengths and weaknesses in language development. Using the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores as a benchmark, the ESL teacher can focus on particular areas of student need, i.e. reading, writing, listening, speaking, and content areas. The teacher uses a variety of ESL instructional methodologies and strategies to help the student improve their academic language development through the use of thematic units, vocabulary games, realia, visuals and manipulatives. C. ELL's receiving 4-6 years of service will be instructed as per the strategies described above. D. Our long term ELLs may not reach proficiency due to the severity of their disabilities. They will continue to be supported through the communication and technology components of their programs. E. Former ELL's receive minimally scaffolded English language instruction for two years following their exit from the program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use a variety of instruction strategies such as Total Physical Response (TPR) and Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), as well as the Santillana Intensive English series, to accelerate English language development. We also use technology such as iPads. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular and scheduling flexibility to maximize Mr. Ferguson's instructional group sizes and frequency of instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 CEP 56  We offer tutoring and extra help to students seeking to improve their performance in core areas. Within our school, students at out (AIL) Adams street site receive after school homework help Students can receive one on one help with our ENL teacher Mr. Ferguson. (within our title 3 program) as well as reinforcement for state tests (ELA and Math with our Math teacher Mr.Samuel). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? No new programs are currently being considered. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL's are automatically and by default guaranteed equal access to all school programs, and P369K acts in accordance with this. In addition, ELL's are invited to participate in P369K's Title III program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Santillana English; IPads; Dolch instructional materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish-language support is provided at the main site by Mr. Garcia. Other than this, home language support falls outside the purview of the ENL department. P369K has no DL or TBE program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The LPT and IEP teams in each building, as well as regular observations by administrators, are used to ensure that all required services and resources are appropriately applied. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although certain of P369K's sites are co-located, this does not in any way impact the needs of our ELL's. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P369K does not engage incoming ELL's prior to the commencement of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In another site within P369 (P261) students have the option of studying mathematics in Arabic according to the CCLS. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 57  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the 2017-2018 school year, staff development will include issues pertaining to ELL students such as interpretation and translation services for parents and students, Jose P. training, CCLS, NYSESLAT testing of ELL students with autism, Alternate Assessment strategies, incorporation of technology in the ENL curriculum and content areas, and best practices in the ENL classroom. These services are provided through the District 75 Department of ELL’s. P369K’s teachers and paraprofessionals receive support from our district instructional coaches. In addition, we ensure the attendance of administrators, our ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and / or paraprofessionals at district, city, and state wide conferences/ workshops focusing on the education of ELLs. All administrators and teachers are required to attend Jose P. training. ENL teachers are encouraged to attend a range of professional development workshops held throughout the year by the District 75 Department of ELL's. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P369K ensures that its teachers attend District 75 Office of ELL professional development workshops. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are informed of their child’s academic progress and status in our ENL program through various means. In September parents are sent a detailed letter about our ENL program and are encouraged to visit the school throughout the school year. Parents are informed of their options during the Educational Planning Conference at the CSE level. Ongoing progress reports are given during parent-teacher conferences and I.E.P. meetings. We also encourage parents to attend the yearly ELL Parent Conference which also allows parents an opportunity to keep informed of the current ESL programs which are offered in the district and throughout the school. Translation services are offered through alternate placement paraprofessionals. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement aimed specifically at the parents of ELL's is limited to our annual Title III program. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  2018-19 CEP 59 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rudy Giuliani, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 60  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P369 School DBN: 75K369 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marjorie Dalrymple Title Principal Janine Nardone Assistant Principal Sofia Bugdady Parent Coordinator Lateef Ferguson ENL/Bilingual Teacher S.Harry Parent Stephanie Curry/Sped. Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Carpenter Cynthia Torres Coach Coach Christine Swanson School Counselor Kettler Louissant N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/12/17 6/12/17 6/12/17 6/12/17 6/12/17 6/12/17 ----- --- 6/12/17 6/12/17 6/12/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 61  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75K359 School Name: P369K Superintendent: LouissaintKetl The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Shondell Harry LAC Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home languages of students and their families are determined through the HLS, through home language functions on ATS, and SESIS, and through personal interviews with families. Materials are sent to parents through the Language Access Coordinator, Shondell Harry, P369K uses alternate placement paraprofessionals fluent in other languages to communicate with parents. Ms. Harry is also part on our intake process if a parent speaks another language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 62  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Majority of P369’s non-English speaking families speak Spanish. Some families speak Mandarin, Haitian Creole (small percentage), and Arabic. (less than 1%) P369K communicates with the school community in person during our intake process, over the phone, online, and through our website. --- --- --- 10% 10% 10% 45% --- --- --- --- --- --- -- --- ---- --- --- --- 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Written translation of memos and other time-sensitive documents is done by staff members and teachers who are fluent in the families’ native languages. In the case of form letters, like the HLS, P369K retains many copies in several relevant languages. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Staff members lead by our LAC help translate all memos and documents for our parents. They are sent home with a copy in English ,and another copy in the parents preferred home language. Families Major Holidays (distributed usually 2-3 days before holiday) Xmas Break 12/18/17 Midwinter Recess 2/12/18 2018-19 CEP 63  ---- --- --- Spring Break 4/9/17 ---- ---- ----- ---- --- --- 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face-to-face meetings include Curriculum Night, held in early October Parent-Teacher Night, held in early November. Late September memos will be distributed. interpretation service(s)? Staff members will be present during these nights to provide any translation when requested by the parent(s)/guardian(s). --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. P369's staff members who are bilingual will reach out to any and all parents when/if there is an emergency within our school. Within every site we have a staff member who is bilingual. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC will work with the Principal and assistant principals to ensure staff members are all aware of the chancellors regulations. Memos will then be distributed to staff to ensure cooperation from all staff members when their assistance is mandatory and needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 CEP 64  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Administrators, ENL teachers or staff working with ELL’s provide native language services to students’ families. All languages considered covered according to Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 are spoken by staff members at P369K. Written translation is also done by staff members, and form letters are available on site for all covered languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P369K will institute a parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 65 
