2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 23K401 School Name: CHRISTOPHER AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: DEON MITCHELL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 332300010401 PK-5 51 CHRISTOPHER AVENUE BROOKLYN, NY11212 718-495-5761 Section 1: School Information Page School Information CHRISTOPHER AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL School Number (DBN): 23K401 Phone Number: 718-495-5764 Fax: DEON MITCHELL DMITCHE5@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): DEON MITCHELL LinetteMcfadden TEKESHAEARLE FREDERICA WEST UNIQUACINTRON NA NA NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 23 Superintendent’s Office Address: PATE, MIATHERESA Superintendent: 1665 St. Marks Avenue, Room 125 MPATE@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn New York 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Deon Mitchell LinetteMcFadden Ms. Folks N/A UniquaCintron NA NA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) FredreicaWest Staff/SLT Chairperson Ms. Nora Jean-Louis Member/ SLT Secretary 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  OthaleeChoice Alicia Farrell Ms. Earl Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our mission is to develop a culture where rigorous habits of learning are embedded in the minds of our students and in the hearts of our staff. Our students are expected to become inquiry-minded thinkers who positively impact their school, community, country and world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At Christopher Avenue Community School (CACS), students learn how to build and realize their dreams. We are a dedicated and nurturing school community that work together to foster a culture where failure is not an option and success is the only choice. Through a balanced curriculum, effective teacher practices, continuous assessments, tiered instruction and academic interventions, students are carefully guided to create a success plan towards graduation and for life. Strategic collaborations and partnerships with agencies and community based organizations include: Partnership for the Homeless, Emmanuel Baptist Church, Christmas Givers and the Youth Officers of the 73rd Precinct, New York Cares and Brownsville Multi-Service Family Health Center. These partnerships allow us to provide support programs and targeted services to our school community. Local Emmanuel Baptist Church and New York Cares donated necessary materials and supplies to the entire student population. These included backpacks, school supplies, sneakers, and a wide array of Christmas toys. Youth and Safety Liaison Officer for students in temporary housing provides professional development for staff, teachers and administrators; unpacking psychological, social and academic challenges that impact students and families living in shelters. Brownsville Multi-Service Family Health Center, a new partnership formed during the summer of 2016, will help our families learn how to live healthier lives and empower them to move beyond any social emotional or psychological barriers. To foster and further our mission, our stakeholders including teachers, CBOs, parents, and support staff partnered with the administrative team to analyze our school wide assessment data to craft the following yearlong instructional focus statement - Utilizing questions and student discourse, improving teachers' professional practices to lead rigorous data driven instruction for all students. Using this focus statement, we strategically worked with our partners to align their ideas with our vision and mission around student achievement. Our after school partner, Nia Community Services will use innovative and creative programs such as the arts, STEM, and the athletic tournaments to continue to boost students academic interest, attendance, provide support for parents, and overall school spirit. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population includes 4% ELL, 28% students with disabilities, 51% students in temporary housing, 68% of our population is Black/African Americans, 28% are Hispanics and 94% of our student body receives free lunch. Given our unique student population, serving them effectively requires some out of the box initiatives and partnerships. Focusing on the "strong families/strong communities" aspect of the framework we initiated and implemented programs that are designed to empower our parents. Through our monthly "My Voice" sessions, families are welcome to coffee and talk meetings with the principal and the parent coordinator. In these meetings, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  the school administrator(s) have an opportunity to listen to the concerns of families. Families are also allowed to: share their ideas for school improvement, give suggestions for professional development, ask questions and review one aspect of our school's culture or educational programs. Parents are motivated and empowered when they see their ideas or suggestions infused in any element of the school. Other activities such as family nights, book fair, holiday shows, and our weekly "talk to me Tuesday" allow our school and community to collaborate in learning as we work to build stronger families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools, in which CACS has made the most progress, is evident in the ways we continue to create a supportive learning environment for all students. For students who live with the daily insecurities of homelessness, giving them a consistently safe environment is both a challenge and a requirement. P.S. 401 excels at this element through daily morning meetings - "Changing the Mindset" fosters a supportive learning environment through implementation of a rigorous curriculum designed to address our students social emotional needs. Given the special social and emotional needs of our student population, it is important that we take the time to prepare our students for learning. Our goal is to help them to recognize their school environment as a safe and happy place where learning is fun. Using positive affirmations, each morning students are prepared for learning. Scholars benefit and respond positive affirmations and are taught to use them to shape their thinking. After preparing the minds for our scholars, they enter the classrooms with challenges but believing that they can be successful. We believe student learn best in a student centered inquiry-based environment. In this environment, students are encouraged to investigate, explore, and research ideas and concepts that will further their understanding of the world around them. Questioning and discussions are used to drive critical thinking and channel further conversations, problem solving, and inquiry. Students learn best when they are given actionable teacher feedback (based on quality assessments) that includes praise, affirmation and next steps to build self confidence and inspire drive. Excellence in achievement results from this. We believe students learn best when their efforts are celebrated and appreciated. Our school-wide instructional focus is vocabulary and language development. Students will develop relevant skills in content vocabulary across all subject areas, which will be translated to stronger writing, and develop communication skills that support college and career readiness.The element of the Framework for Great Schools in that will remain a key area of focus for this school year is rigorous instruction. It is our belief that continuing to embed rigor in instruction aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards will improve student achievement. The Depth of Knowledge (DOK) chart is used to help define the level of rigor for instruction. Instruction that is inquiry based and applicable to real world experiences will allows students to apply knowledge, to critically analyze, to evaluate information so that they are able to generate new ideas, draw meaningful conclusions, and solve problems in multiple ways. CACS rigor is defined by depth, purposeful questions and discussions, quality assessments and actionable feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 23K401 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 302 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 54 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 95.4% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 32.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.56 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 23 24 84.0% 2.0% 20.5% 65.9% 0.0% 0.7% 2 20% 6.7 32.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the 2017-2018 school year concluded, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data around student progress. Our school’s strengths, accomplishments and challenges were identified after analyzing our Quality Review Report, Principal Performance Observations, Benchmark Assessments, Dibels Assessments, I-Ready Assessments, preliminary New York State English Language Arts / Math testing data as well as Fountas and Pinnell Reading data. Reflecting upon our 2017-18 goal in this area, the SLT noted that while we did achieve our annual goal, a significant number of students are still reading far below grade level. Therefore, improving students' literacy skills, especially for students who are reading below grade level remains a priority. A few of the findings of the most recent (2016 - 2017) Quality Review are: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products.  Observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection . " Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shift and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products". "Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning".   The reviewer also found that School leaders have established a set of criteria for classroom practices, which is aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching that most teachers follow which reflects high expectations for lesson planning and small group instruction. Beliefs about how students learn best drives expectations for classroom activities which should be student centered, in an inquiry based environment, allowing opportunities to investigate, explore, and research ideas and concepts that will further their understanding of the world around them. The Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) supports administration to further develop teachers’ knowledge of pedagogy and skill base, and promote a collaborative environment for further professional learning and growth. During a teacher team meeting, teachers remarked that this ongoing support is impacting teaching and learning across the school. The professional development lab is a center for resources and a place for teachers to find the necessary tools to implement effective strategies into their classrooms. On the other hand, the same report found that our instructional strategies did not "illustrate optimal use of extensions to further differentiate learning for students at varied proficiency levels." The report also found that there were uneven levels of student engagement and participation across classrooms. There were missed opportunities for student to student discourse and for students to take ownership of their learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, tailored literacy intervention targeting students reading three (3) or more levels below their grade will be implemented across grades K-5; resulting in improved student ability to read on grade level, as measured by a 10% increase of students reading on grade level across grades as assessed by Fountas and Pinnell benchmarking. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To ensure that at least 10% of students read (3) or more levels below their grade improve their ability to read on grade level, students will engage in academic practices that will foster improvement in reading and the use of decoding strategies. Students will engage in phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension drills designed to help them climb the stairway to becoming proficient readers. Teachers will participate in Professional Development training and activities to build their instruction and leadership capacity, and parents will be encouraged to partner with our school through workshops designed to empower and involve them in their children’s educational process. Teachers Students Literacy Coach Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 – June 2019 Classroom Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal Support Staff The Universal Literacy Coach will focus primarily on improving literacy instruction in Grades K-2 through the Fundations curriculum, by modeling best instructional practices, reviewing instructional activities and assessments, and providing sample action plans for scaffolding instruction for individual students, and coaching teachers in the use and analysis of data. Collaborative Work: Teacher teams will work with their colleagues and the administration to analyze student reading assessment data and use information to inform their drive their practice. Weekly and bi-weekly students assessment for the purpose of progress monitoring. The data will be used to identify areas for Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers Support Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  growth, inform curricula and instruction via unit and lesson planning and continued RTI collaboration. Grade level leaders will participate in cross-grade planning through Instructional Cabinet Meetings. Teachers will participate in ongoing parent meetings to discuss student progress or lack of and next steps that must be taken. Teacher teams will analyze data and use findings to create, differentiate and modify instructional groups for students, including SWDs and ELLs. Professional Development: Teachers will be trained in Fundation Wilson Language Basics, Tier 1 RTI Literacy techniques, Tier 2 Small group Literacy Instruction, Progress Monitoring and Assessment, how to develop questions and tasks aligned to reading and comprehension. Determine research based strategies for supporting all students, including ELLs and SWDs. September 2018 – June 2019 Literacy Coach Administration Teachers, Literacy Coach, After-school Providers Administrators will conduct cycles of observations, learning walks, or instructional rounds around the instructional goals in order to provide targeted feedback to improve or enhance teaching practices. Assessments: Teachers Teachers and administrators will work together to analyze student work and data, in order to monitor the progress towards achieving the reading goal set for each student. Appropriate goals and interventions/enrichment action plans will be created and implemented for groups of students and individual students. September 2018– June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Use student data to craft individual intervention plans and response to RTI strategies. Information on student progress, performance and next steps will be shared with parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Support: The parent coordinator will implement a professional development plan that provides parent monthly learning opportunities to ensure knowledge and understanding of CCLS and reading program, as they pertain to literacy development. The parent coordinator will promote and use “Talk to me Tuesdays” as a means to collaborate, involve and support parents to help their children. Teachers will review students' IEP goals with parents, and provide them with strategies to support their children's literacy development at home. The ELL teacher will meet with parents of English language learners and provide them with activities and strategies to support linguistic and literacy development at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will show that we combined federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, Title III Funds, NYSTL, and human resources to implement this goal from September 2018 – June 2019 as indicated below: ● Textbooks and consumable instructional materials and supplies for use during regular day programs ● Teacher per session for after school data specialist responsibilities, curriculum mapping, professional development planning for turn-key workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmark: By February 2019, 5% of students who were reading (3) or more levels below their grade level in September 2018 will be approaching grade level in literacy, as measured by Fountas & Pinnell reading levels, given excellence in their attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The 2016-17 Quality review data show that we are proficient in high expectation. Our beliefs about how students learn best drives expectations for classroom activities. We use small group instruction to address each students unique needs. Teachers collaborate in vertical and horizontal teacher teams to plan instruction that addresses the need of all students. We have seen an increase in parent involvement and participation. The school quality snapshot shows that we are steadily making an impact in our school community. The 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report indicates that 49% of our students have 90% or higher attendance, compare to the city average of 78%. Research shows that students who are chronically absent have lower achievement, and are at higher risk of dropping out. The Framework Report also indicates that 49% of teachers responded positively to questions around Social-Emotional support. These data points indicate that attendance and social-emotional support are priority areas of need in our school. Reflecting upon the 2017-18 goal of increasing attendance has led administration and the SLT to determine that improving school wide attendance and decreasing chronic absenteeism remain high priorities for 2018-19. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the continued improvement of Positive Behavior Intervention Systems (PBIS) will foster a school culture where all stakeholders will understand and problem-solve the root causes of absenteeism among Students in Temporary Housing (STH); as measured by a 5% increase in the number of students who have 90% attendance or higher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Refresher teacher training on PBIS, including a detailed guide for teachers to refer to Teachers Examine the achievements of the year of implementation and have staff share how we can continue to build. Administrative monitoring of the continued improvement of PBIS strategies. The attendance team will monitor daily attendance for target subgroup and conduct out reach to ensure attendance goals are met. Teachers Frequent teacher meetings to reflect upon PBIS improvement plan and share best practices. NIA Community Consulting, our partnering CBO, will work to ensure student participating in their programs are consistent with their attendance. Teachers Ensure the PBIS store is open consistently for student incentives Students August 2018-November 2018 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-October 2018 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance Counselor, Assistant principal &Lead PBIS Teachers Principal & AP Principal & AP Guidance Counselor Meeting with the Students in Temporary Housing (STH) liaison to plan strategic interventions for this subgroup and additional outreach to shelters. February-June 2019 Attendance Team, School Leaders Students, with a focus on the STH subgroup Utilizing a consultant who possess deep knowledge of the community to provide PD for teachers and workshops for parents around improving student attendance. School leaders and teachers emphasizing the importance of student attendance during parent-teacher conferences and all school events and celebrations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops on PBIS Define clear expectations around the importance of daily student attendance during all parent orientations. Ensure PTA is fully educated and has full understanding of their role in PBIS July 2018 -- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, PTA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance Counselor, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Supplies for PBIS Store, Attendance Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We expect to see a 1.5% increase in daily student attendance by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure attendance daily using the ATS Period Attendance Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our students' progress in the NYS Common Core Math assessment indicated that 18% students met state standards in math and the average score is 2.26 out of 4.5. A five percent increase (5%) in data is evidenced as compared to 2016-2017, where 10% students met State standards on the state math test; and average score was 2.19 out of 4.5. As a result of this analysis, it was evident that the 5% increase trend in Mathematics is a result of making math a focus area. This year, math will continue to be a primary focus area in instruction and learning. The 2017 School Quality Guide makes it evident that Mathematics need to be a primary focus area. Based on the data and with a focus on the framework for collaborative teacher, there is a need to improve math instruction. Using collaborative teacher planning and professional development teachers will create and implement intervention strategies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  designed to re- mediated student math skills. The extension of our learning day through our success academy after school will allow us to target individual/groups students for math instruction around their specific areas of need. The District-Charter Collaborative helped the school identify multi-step Mathematics problems as an area of focus, and we anticipate continuing that work via the Learning Partners Program in 2018-19. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will improve their methodology for teaching multi-step word problems in Mathematics, as measured by a 5% increase in student proficiency on the New York State Common Core Math Assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To ensure that at least 5% of students demonstrate improved performance in targeted Math skills, students will engage in daily academic data driven instruction designed to equip them to become independent problem solvers applying grade level skills and concepts. Teachers Students September 2018 – June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) *Administration *Teachers * LPP Math Team Students will utilize specific practices and problem solving templates that have been tested and proved effective by the District Charter Collaborative (DCC) Math Team We will build and expand upon the work of the DCC program through the Learning Partners Program, improving our teachers' skills in scaffolding and teaching multi-step Math problems. DCC math team will visit partner schools and collaborate and share math practices with their colleagues. Bi-weekly data meetings will be used, allowing teachers to analyze student work, surface gaps, and receive resources to determine next steps in improving instruction. Rigor: Teachers and administrators will unpack the CCLS Mathematics standards during school-wide and grade level meetings. Teachers Students September 2018– June 2019 *Administration *Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27 LPP Math Team Teachers and administrators will examine CCLS aligned multi-steps word problems across all grade levels and pinpoint necessary steps that students must be able to take in order to be successful. Teachers and administrators will work with the LPP math team to identify effective school-wide math practices that will effectively lead to student success with multi-step word problems. Students will learn how to analyze and answer the state-released questions including multi-step word problems to gain insight on what each standard requires at each grade level. Teachers and students will develop questions and prompts aligned to each of the priority standards. Students will engage in complex problem-solving and discussions during Math classes. Teachers will determine research-based strategies for supporting all students in mastering each standard. Professional Development: Teachers September 2018– June 2019 The Learning Partners Program Math Team will provide professional training including: turnkey information, demonstrate specific practice/methods, team teach, and lead professional discussions. The Instructional Cabinet will implement a Professional Development Plan that provides parent learning opportunities to solidify knowledge of the CCLS and the core curriculum. Teacher teams will be trained in effective team strategies and protocols for effective team planning and collaboration. *Administration *Instructional Cabinet *Teacher Teams *LPP Math Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Teacher teams will be guided in identifying specific elements within the curriculum that aligns to the targeted goal. Teacher teams will be trained in unpacking Math unit standards and tasks to create a coherent sequence of learning targets. Teachers who demonstrate highly effective practices in writing instruction and differentiation will be leveraged to share best practices. They will collaborate with their peers and model lessons during classroom inter-visitations, grade-wide conferences and other professional learning sessions. Math Coach/Peer Collaborative teacher will unpack CCLS targeted Math standards in schoolwide and grade level meetings, model classrooms will be created and used as a training center to support teachers. Assessments: Students Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers and administrators will work with the LPP math team to monitor and assess students progress around solving multi-step word problems. All students will use modified versions of the four square problem solving template to complete a "Problem of the Day" designed to foster and assess the specific skills/techniques necessary to effectively solve multi-step word problems. Teachers and administrators will work together to analyze student work and data, in order to monitor the progress towards achieving the priority standards. Adjustments will be made to subsequent units and to the professional learning opportunities as needed. *Administration *Instructional Cabinet *Teacher Team *LPP Math Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Appropriate goals and interventions/enrichment action plans will be created and implemented for groups of students and individual students. Use student data to craft individual intervention plans and response to RTI strategies in Writing. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and administration will share information on student progress, performance and next steps with parents. Parents will have the opportunity to sit in on LPP workshops Parents will be invited to participate with their children in Math learning academies held after-school. During parent conference evenings they will have an opportunity to learn more about the math curriculum Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will show that we combined federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, Title III Funds, NYSTL, and human resources to implement this goal from September 2018– June 2019 as indicated below: ● GoMath, Textbooks, iReady Math materials and consumable instructional materials and supplies for use during regular day programs ● Teacher per session for after school data specialist responsibilities, math curriculum mapping, professional development planning for turn-key workshops, Peer collaborative teacher Title I Parent Workshops and programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint Benchmark: By February 2019, we expect to see a 3% increase in the number of students performing at the proficient on assessment standards using the Go Math assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Go Math chapter assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-17 Quality review data shows that we are well-developed in teacher support and supervision. School leaders provide on-going support to teachers through regular classroom visit, and differentiated professional development. According to the reviewer, "Support for teachers and staff is based on an analysis of student work products, as well as teacher data. Each teacher has written professional goals and related learning experiences that are structured around the Danielson Framework for Teaching and results in improved teacher practice and student progress. There is a robust teacher observation schedule, which includes both the principal and assistant principal visiting teachers simultaneously and then norming and calibrating their ratings to ensure coherence within observations. As part of the school’s practice, it is customary during the post observation conference for teachers to self-evaluate themselves and analyze the results of the work produced by students during the visit". The 2017 Framework for Great Schools report indicates that 80% of staff responded positively to questions around instructional leadership, which is a 26% increase from last year's survey. Also, 76% of teachers responded positively to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  question around program coherence, which is a 36% increase from last academic year. Similarly, we were rated well-developed in how well the school allocate and manage resources. After a review of quantitative and qualitative data sources including feedback from PPO, the SLT concluded that continuing to support teacher growth in questioning ensuring that teachers use data to drive classroom instruction is a top priority within Effective School Leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administrative team will ensure that teachers use data to drive classroom instruction to meet the needs of all students including SWDs and ELLs, as measured by the improvement in pre and post units/chapter assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal & AP will conduct frequent, targeted observations of teachers and provide timely, actionable feedback. Teachers The administrative team will conduct bi-weekly, grade level data meetings, allowing teachers to analyze student work, surface gaps, and provide teachers with instructional resources to address those gaps. Teachers Principal & AP Principal & AP September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Provide teachers with professional development and opportunities to improve their craft through quality research base training and learning experiences. Learning opportunities that are connected to their individual professional need Teachers will use small group differentiated instruction to meet the needs of all students including those with SWDs, ELLs, and at-risk students. Providing high-quality after-school programs (academic & extra-curricular activities) and student government that will inspire and motivate students to become leaders throughout the school and community, and achieve their full potential as students and citizens. Students October 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, & Parent Coordinator, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will continue to include information on the school's instructional vision, and provide parents with access to the curriculum. We consider parents as key stake holders, thus they were invited and will continue to be invited to join our capacity building planning sessions, SLT and PTA meetings, and to participate in targeted professional workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Instructional Resources, After-school Program Supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will conduct a survey of teachers to measure their satisfaction around issues of instructional leadership. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To measure and monitor parent involvement, we will utilize parent sign in sheets, internal survey, and participation in parent conferences and workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the 2016-2017 school year concluded, we conducted a comprehensive review of our school’s educational program. Information was gathered using current quantitative and qualitative data with respect to student progress. Our school’s strengths, accomplishments and challenges were identified after analyzing our Quality Review Report, Principal Performance Observations and School Survey. Based on our 2017 quality review, our ability to communicate high expectations for quality teaching and learning across the school contributed to the engagement of staff and families in activities that promoted accountability for learning. Focusing on the "strong families/strong communities aspect of the framework we initiate and implement programs that are designed to empower our parents. Through our monthly "My Voice" sessions families are welcomed to a coffee and talk meeting with the principal and the parent coordinator. In these meetings families are given the opportunity to: share their ideas for school improvement, give suggestions for professional development, ask questions and review a specific aspect of our school's culture or educational program. Parents are motivate and empowered when they note elements of their ideas or suggestions infused in our school in some small way. Other activities such as family nights, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  book fairs, holiday shows, and our "weekly talk to me Tuesday" allow our school and community to collaborate in learning as we work to build stronger families. The SLT's analysis of quantitative and qualitative indicators around school culture indicate that while the school reached its 2017-18 annual goal, continued improvement in school culture remains a priority moving forward. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the continued improvement of PBIS will result in more positive school community as measured by a 3% increase in agree/strongly agree responses on questions related to school culture on the NYC survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  We have found that when schools, families and community groups work together to support learning, children tend to do better in school, stay in school longer, and like school more. This is the conclusion of a new wave of evidence, a report from SouthWest (2002). The report, a synthesis of research on parent involvement over the past decade, also found that regardless of family income and/or background, students with involved parents, are more likely to: “earn higher grades and test scores, and enroll in higher-level programs, be promoted, pass their classes, attend school regularly, have better social skills, show improved behavior, and adapt well to school. “ Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families September 2018 – June 2019 *Administration *Parent Coordinator  These student behaviors are valued here at P.S. 401. For these reasons, we continue to work to increase and strengthen family community ties by: Families July 2018 – June 2019 *Administration *Parent Coordinator  Helping parents understand how they can partner with the school to ensure the success of their children.  Providing strategies and support for parents who need assistance to gain the tools and skills needed to bolster their child’s academic success.  Implementing an aggressive attendance support program that includes early intervention and prevention components.  Utilizing the attendance team to partner with the Students in Temporary Housing (SITH) liaison to identify and remedy students with chronic attendance problems.  Working with the Parent Coordinator to create community outreach programs designed to educate and empower parents in correcting and overcoming their challenging situations.  Surveying parents on attendance issues, barriers and other school-wide concerns. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38   Building partnerships with other community based organizations .  Creating a school culture and climate of high expectations that establishes collaborative learning and opportunities.  Designing and developing systems and structures that will ensure positive student engagement.  Using monthly School Leadership Team Meetings to plan purposeful activities, examine data trends and brainstorm solutions.  Facilitating collaborations between School Leaders and the Parent Coordinator in conjunction with the Parent Teacher Association to promote and model positive parent actions and encourage parent involvement. Parents will participate in orientation where they will be given more information about PBIS and their role. The PTA will lead monthly sessions where parents are given updates on school-wide PBIS initiatives and opportunities of involvement 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NIA Community Consulting Group, FYRZone, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School Wide Program school, conceptual consolidation will show that we combined federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I funds, Title III Funds and human resources to implement this goal from September 2017 – June 2018 as indicated below:  Parent Coordinator   Title I Parent Workshops and programs Support PTA outreach activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  The administrative team will survey school community quarterly to assess improvement in culture. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator's Call Log, Survey response log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) *Non Readers *Level 1 & Level 2 Mathematics *Level 1 & Level 2 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ●Writing Lab for 3-5 graders designed to develop students’ basic writing skills (sentences structures and paragraphs) as well as teaching writers how to develop their thoughts around narrative, informational and persuasive writing. ●Developing language and phonemic awareness in grades Pk-2 using oral literacy and Foundational Phonics. ●Building academic vocabulary in grades 3-5 using tiered instruction and context clues ●Building students’ fluency using Leveled Literacy Intervention and Finish Line ●Math Lab for 3-5 graders designed to develop students’ understanding of Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ●Students will be assigned to the writing lab once per week during their small group after-school session. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services are provided during our regular school day program, during our after-school success academy, and Saturday Classes ● Language development and phonemic awareness is done daily in whole and small group session. It is also carried out in one-to-one if necessary. ● Vocabulary development is done daily in whole and small group session. It is also carried out in one-to-one if necessary. ●Building fluency is done in small group sessions ●Students will be assigned to the math lab once per week during their small Services are provided during our regular school day program, during our after- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Science *Non Readers *Level 1 & Level 2 Social Studies *Non Readers *Level 1 & Level 2 *FBA & BIP *At Risk At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) place value concepts, fraction concepts, measurement concepts and their ability to apply these understanding to solve real-life problems. ●Building math fluency using math games and practice techniques for students in grades K-5. ●Ready Math Online and Finish Line. Using adaptive technology to practice, assess and measure growth in math skills. ●Science Fair Research Team, students in grades 3-5 conduct research and experiments in preparation for their entrance to the Elementary School science Fair. ●Discovery Education Online NG Online and Time for Kids Counseling by the Guidance counselor, at-risk family intervention, crisis and mandated support by social worker group after-school session. school success academy and ,Saturday Classes ●Building math fluency is done in small group sessions. ●Adaptive online math is done daily in whole and small group session. It is also carried out in one-to-one if necessary. Science Fair Research is done daily in whole and small group session. It is also carried out in one-to-one if necessary. Services are provided during our regular school day program, during our after-school success academy and ,Saturday Classes Small Group After School Small Group, 1.1 Services are provided during our regular school day program, during our after-school success academy and ,Saturday Classes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 162 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Emergency School Supplies, Bookbags, Coats, Uniforms and clothing, Partnering with STH liaison and conducting house call meetings at local shelters to support attendance. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Prior to hiring a candidate, their credentials are verified by the HR Director to ensure that the candidate holds a valid NYS certification in that license area. The BEDS survey is reviewed by the Principal and the HR Director who work with our school to ensure that every teacher’s assignment aligns with their license area so that all teachers are reported as Highly Qualified on the BEDS Survey. Strategies and activities used to recruit, retain and support highly qualified teachers are indicated below: ● Frequent communication with our HR Director when vacancies occur. ● Central Office of Talent and Recruitment partners with colleges and the HR Director partners with Central for assistance and guidance and for candidate referrals. ● Participating in Central Hiring Fair events where pre-screened HQT candidates are interviewed and recruited. ● Establishing a partnership with a local college to support the grooming of student teachers in our search of HQT candidates. ● Interviewing HQT candidates from The Open Market Hiring System and The Absent Teacher Reserve (ATR) Pool. ● Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members including demonstration lessons, interviews, and New York State certification/licensing. ● Maintaining a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices. ● Teachers will be provided with curriculum maps, instructional resources and professional learning opportunities to ensure that teachers improve teaching practice as per ADVANCE and Danielson and are highly qualified. ● New teachers are paired with a mentor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● Teachers are encouraged to participate in Lunch and Learns, after school PDs and to attend off-site workshops when appropriate. ● Individualized PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. ● Carefully made teacher assignments are designed to match teacher talent with school needs. ● In the very rare event, if a teacher’s status was deemed not HQT, the principal would consult with the Borough Human Resources Director for guidance to ensure that the non-HQT teacher will meet all required documentation and teacher assessment deadlines. This may include some form of counseling including encouraging the teacher to become HQT through the High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school developed a comprehensive professional development plan that addresses CCLS, Danielson our instructional focus and school-wide goals. Professional development opportunities are also differentiated based on the needs of groups of teachers and individual teachers. Our high quality professional development will include but not be limited to the following: ● Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities conducted by the Borough or district team, Talent Coach, content coaches, instructional lead teachers and Assistant Principals in the content areas of ELA, ● Math, Science and Social Studies and how Danielson can support teaching practices in content areas. ● The Principal, APs, coaches and instructional lead teachers will attend workshops provided by the Borough Field Support Center relating to CCLS and Danielson. They will turnkey the information and deliver workshops or Lunch and Learns to teachers and paraprofessionals in the use of DOK, Essential questions, ongoing assessment practices to increase best practices to increase academic rigor in literacy, math, science and social studies aligned with CCLS. ● Implementation of the new Core Curriculum for ELA and Math will be supported through high quality professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals delivered by the principal, APs, instructional leads Borough Field Support Center or the outside educational consultant.  Teacher teams will be trained in how to use data effectively to develop flexible grouping, track student performance trends and elevate programs and strategies in order to monitor and revise their practices Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). As a neighborhood school we will enroll students from zoned neighborhoods. We will form a PreK-to-K Transition Team including the Principal, AP Early Childhood, School Counselor, IEP Teacher, the Parent Coordinator, and parents (if applicable) who will work collaboratively to assist preschool children as they transition from early childhood programs to the elementary school program. The team will meet monthly to track student data trends and evaluate overall readiness. Eligible students will be provided with early intervention services to address academic and social/emotional needs. During the year, PreK teacher teams and Kindergarten teacher teams will evaluate curriculum for vertical and horizontal alignment through the lens of the Common Core Learning Standards to ensure a seamless transition from PreK to kindergarten. To ensure seamless transitions, the expectation is that our PreK and Kindergarten teachers will engage in Lunch and Learns regarding CCLS for Early Childhood grades. Our school embraces a Parents-As-Partners model through professional development opportunities and parent engagement activities that increase parent involvement, build parent effectiveness, deepen their understanding of CCLS while elevating high expectations for student learning. The PreK-to-K Transition Team will act as the steering committee for this initiative by meeting regularly throughout the school year to monitor the process and suggest revisions to actions and strategies in order to ensure a smooth transition from the early childhood Pre K program to the Kindergarten elementary school program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL team attended Central and professional development sessions to learn about MOSL and the New ADVANCE teacher evaluation system. The MOSL team met several times to review all options. The principal’s decision, on the selection of the MOSL assessment measures, was informed by recommendations made by the MOSL team. Each month 3 hours of professional development is scheduled to provide professional development regarding the use of MOSL assessments and ADVANCE to improve instruction. In addition to MOSL, our school uses several appropriate assessment measures such as common pre and post unit assessments, predictive assessments, classroom assessments, and online assessments. Teacher Teams look at student work and track student performance trends to establish flexible grouping and to provide scaffolds and extensions to accelerate student learning. The school also uses multiple assessment measures to inform professional development opportunities that are scheduled throughout the year and are aligned with Danielson, the new Core Curriculum in ELA and Math and to build teacher capacity in the use of data assessment results to improve instructional practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Administration, teachers, support staff, and parents engaged in four days capacity building sessions to deeply analyze student assessment results. They collaboratively identified trends and patterns and used the information obtained to create and revise systems and structures to ensure that the academic and socio-emotional needs of all students, including students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, and at-risk students are met. Based on the capacity building sessions, teachers and staff were invited to a week long planning session in late August to plan lesson and units for the upcoming academic year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 244,281.00 16,979 63.648 0 0 0 2,032,958.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A,5B 5C, 5D, 5E Sections 5A,5B 5C,5E Sections 5A,5B 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. CHRISTOPHER AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  CHRISTOPHER AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL will support parents and families of Title I students by: ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ●providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  CHRISTOPHER AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leaders II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leaders III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 23 School Name CHRISTOPHER AVENUE COMMUNITY SCHOOL Borough Brooklyn School Number 401 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deon Mitchell Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Ms Jaqueline Regist, CommonBr Teacher/Subject Area Kye Weaver Common Branch Related-Service Provider Ms. Randle, Speech Superintendent Dr. MiaTheresa Pate Assistant Principal Debra Friday Coach School Counselor Cassandra Broadnax Parent Ana Botero Parent Coordinator Marie-Denise Jean Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 296 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.05% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 2016-1706/19/17 K 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 2016-17 2016-17 TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell Reading Levels Ready Gen Literacy Program Go Math Baseline Assessment CCLS Performance Tasks 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  NYS standardized exams Iready ELA and Math Imagine Learning Amazing English Avenues Getting Reafy for NYSESLAT and beyond The data shows where students need reinforcements as well as areas where instruction can be advanced to the next levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students receive tier 1 instruction as well as language acquisition support from the ESL teacher. They are assessed periodically to determine progress or lack thereof. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYSESLAT, state tests, periodic assessments, formative and summative assessments, Fountas & Pinnell reading Level, iready diagnostic assessment 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have Tier 11 and 111 intervention teacher to provide intensive instructional support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework, the classroom teachers monitor the students at the Tier I level. They provide meaningful instructions, set challenging academic goals and build abilities through dialogue, questioning and sharing ideas. At the Tier I level teachers use unit tests, performance tasks, classroom assignments and class participation to determine who needs further assistance. The teachers use the data from the assessments to see which students have not mastered taught skills or concepts and need to be re-taught. On the Tier II and III levels, the ENL teacher, SETSS teacher provide more targeted instruction and additional academic support to assist students. Data such as class work and participation in these smaller groups is evaluated to see if the child is progressing successfully with this extra assistance. Classroom teachers work with out- of- classroom personnel to improve the Tier II and III services. The out-of-classroom teachers use different strategies to help students master skills and concepts. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 2016 NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores show that ELLs need to strengthen writing and reading skills. Reinforcements is need to advance student performance in speaking and reading. NYSESLAT shows that 20% of students have reached the Expanding level of proficiency. The students who took the NYSITEL Tests for 2016 is as follows: - 6 students at beginnings level incoming immigrants. - 4 students at emerging level -2 students at expanding level 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The instructional team which includes the principal, Assistant principal, ESL teacher, Special education coordinator, and classroom teachers meet monthly to review progress and make adjustments as needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Instruction in the ENL program is provided through pull-out/push-in services. The ENL instructional program is aligned with mandated ENL/ELA and content learning standards and the Common Core Standards. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels in the freestanding ENL program receive 360 minutes of instruction each week, and students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels receive 180 minutes of instruction each week in ENL and ELA. This explicit ESL instruction is delivered according to CR Part 154. The ENL groups are mixed up heterogeneously for targeted area instruction as informed by the NYSITELL and/or the NYSESLAT. There are three groups of ELL students that receive ENL services. Group 1 consists of 1st and 2nd grade students who are at the Entering, Emerging and Expanding levels. Group 2 consists of students from grade 3 who are at the Entering, Emerging, and Expanding levels. Group 3 consists of students in 4th and 5th grade at Entering and Expanding levels. The schedule of our ENL teacher is adjusted to the needs of the students so that all ELLs receive the appropriate amount of time needed to meet the state requirements. The ENL program stresses integration of all four ELA components: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The ENL teacher pulls out and pushes-in to the classrooms during various times of the day thereby assisting during all content areas. During the pull-out classes content-based books and computer program such as imagine learning, iready, and starfall are used for ELA and Math instructions. The needs of all students are met through differentiated instruction. To help the ELL population meet the NYS Learning Standards, instructional strategies such as small group models, pair work, modeling, Phonemic Awareness, Total Physical Response, author and genre studies, use of multicultural literature, graphic organizers, and class presentations will be utilized. The school provides ELLs with an access to Smart Boards and computers in the classrooms as well as an access to language-appropriate software that is aligned to standard-based curriculum. The ENL room has leveled books, author and genre studies materials, multicultural literature, Spanish library, audio and visual equipment. In addition, the ENL teacher uses different instructional materials to support students of all levels of proficiency: research-based reading programs Good Habits/ Great Readers, ENL Activities for Every Month of the School Year, Time for Kids Magazine, Write Time for Kids writing program, The Ready gen program has components that are specially crafted for ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At the beginning of the school year, the ENL teacher and the administration meet to ensure that all ELLs are receiving their mandated number of instructional minutes in all our program models. All of our English Language Learners receive the New York State mandated ENL/ELA instruction time based on students’ proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction a week. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction a week. Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  at Commanding level continue to receive 90 minutes per week of ENL support from the ENL teacher for two years within their classroom setting. Students are grouped according to their proficiency and grade levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In ENL program model content area is incorporated into ENL instruction. Every reading and writing unit in each grade is content- area based. Thus, content area instruction and language learning are combined. Our school uses the GoMath! Math program. In this program students receive mathematics instruction that incorporates hands-on activities, use of manipulative, and technology. We also incorporate the problem of the day where we use the "4 step problem solving" method to guide students thinking in solving multi-steps word problems. This type of program helps support ELLs acquisition of languages and critical thinking. Teachers use strategies that scaffold instruction for English Language Learners. Some of the strategies we implement in our lessons are activating students' prior knowledge, make connections, use visual aides, and organizers. Prior to the each lessons ENL teacher will front load information for optimal comprehension. Explicitly teaching key vocabulary from the text and focusing on concepts and connections is also a main component of ENL instruction. ENL teacher models correct thinking processes in all subject areas, so that learners become capable to work independently. Our program model implements differentiated and direct instruction by providing research based, standard aligned and data driven ENL lessons that focus on content area vocabulary development, phonemic awareness, grammar and writing across the curriculum. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At P.S. 401, we have no SIFE students. However, if they enroll at our school we are well prepared to meet the needs of these students. If SIFE children arrive at our school they will receive 360 minutes of ENL services weekly. They will receive academic intervention services in both reading and math if necessary. b. P.S. 401 maintains English instruction for newcomers by providing all teachers with professional development. The ENL teacher collaborates with the General/Special Education teachers modify the assignments for them and provide productive work that engages newcomers in language learning. Newcomers participate and show comprehension through pointing, nodding, drawing, using actions of simple responses. When necessary, children participate in AIS for additional small group instruction. We are sensitive to our newcomers’ emotional needs in adapting to our culture so we pair beginners with more advanced students who share their common native language. We use translators as needed, and in particular, where applicable, in testing situations. c. Our students who are in the Developing subgroup require additional help in reading and writing based on the NYSESLAT scores: they receive instruction that focuses on building high-order thinking skills during mandated ENL periods and in the classroom. e. Students who have exited the ENL program will receive mandated ENL service for two full school years. They will receive 90 minutes per week within their classroom setting. The ENL teacher in cooperation with General and /or Special education teacher is responsible for monitoring these ELLs. Monitoring consists of the following measures of students performance: report card grades, test scores, student performance, teacher observation, and progress in meeting the NYS Learning 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Standards in all areas. The ENL teacher will assist to adopt and modify materials and instructions to the exited students, thereby facilitating the transition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs are provided with plenty of visuals and dramatized reading material. Total Physical Response, methodologies building academic vocabulary, simplifying content, and concept knowledge are ways to provide access to academic content and accelerate English language development. The technology that is used to help these students includes Smart Boards, CD players and computers. The ENL teacher meets with the School Based Support Team and the Assistant Principal and/or the Principal to make sure ELL-SWDs get the correct ENL services. In some cases, a Bilingual Assistant helps the student in class throughout the day. The ELL-SWDs use the same materials and do the same work as other students. However, the tasks and assignments are differentiated based on the student's abilities and on the IEP. Furthermore, multiple intelligence problem solving strategies are also used by teachers to promote academic success. These strategies include linguistic, logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal and naturalistic. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In our school we have two ELL-SWD students this year. During mandated ENL classes the teacher focuses on the skills in listening speaking phonics learning that will enable the child to meet the standards. Our ELL SWD are pulled out and mainstreamed with other ELLs who are at the same grade level. The students are provided with targeted instruction to meet their learning needs. c. The ENL teacher uses different strategies helping students to acquire academic language, use context to figure out unfamiliar words and expressions, one-on-one instructions, buddy-peer mentoring, manipulative, or a behavior plan when necessary. The ENL teacher uses challenging but understandable materials. The teacher encourages the students to participate in group discussions. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At our school we offer a variety of targeted intervention programs in order to meet the needs of ELLs in ELA and content areas. All of our reading and writing units on every grade are content-area based. ENL instruction is incorporated into Social Studies and Science, reading/writing units thus combining content area instruction and language learning. Our push-in model supports content area instruction. Our Science cluster teacher uses hands-on learning and ENL techniques to introduce new concepts to the ELLs. Our school uses the Ready Gen and GoMath program. This program supports ELLs by incorporating hands-on activities, use of manipulative and Internet technology. We also use iready program which is an adaptive program that assess students, place them in their instructional level, and assign lessons to cover skills and contents they are lacking. Classroom teachers have been made aware that for ELLs two lessons are being learned at once: a set of new concepts as well as a set of new words to describe the concepts. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2017-18 school year our school will have a Music class, Computer Lab, a lending library, and a Science Lab available for all grades. The addition of these classes allow all students, including our ELLs, to have access to the Music, Technology use, and Science instructions. wW will continue our Success After school program in the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any programs for the upcoming school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Our after-school programs are available to all students of the appropriate grades. After-school program will be using the Ready Reading Intervention program and math . Ready program specifically offers differentiation suggestions for English Language Learners as well as preteaching activities to develop content-related vocabulary essential to comprehension. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school uses Smart Boards, IPADs, classroom computers, and individual laptops to supplement classroom instruction in various content areas. Technology integration is supported through ENL appropriate software (Imagine Learning) in our computer lab. There is ongoing professional development to assist teachers who want to become more adept with technology use when working with ELLs. All classrooms in P.S. 401 are equipped with Smart Boards. Professional Development will be provided to assist all teachers in the use of this technology. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At P.S. 401 ENL classroom library contains bilingual and native language books in the native languages spoken by our students. We have bilingual dictionaries and glossaries as well. All of these books are available to all of our students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At P.S. 401 all required services support, and all resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We match materials to each of our student groups. We do this by using materials at various difficulty levels so that all needs can be met. We have materials for students at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding levels of English language proficiency at all ages and grade levels. We accomplish this by analyzing sources of formal and informal data. We provide instruction that meets students needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school uses Smart Boards, IPADs, classroom computers, and individual laptops to supplement classroom instruction in various content areas. Technology integration is supported through ENL appropriate software in our computer lab. There is ongoing professional development to assist teachers who want to become more adept with technology use when working with ELLs. All classrooms in P.S. 401 are equipped with Smart Boards. Professional Development will be provided to assist all teachers in the use of this technology. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents and students are given a tour of the building, they attend classrooms during Open School Week. They also have the opportunity to meet with the ENL teacher, support staff, administrators, and parent coordinator to express any concerns or needs before the child comes into the building. During the first week of the academic school year parents and newly identified ELLs also participate in our Curriculum Day or Night orientation, which is designed to have parents and students visit their future classrooms and meet with their classroom teachers to discuss class expectations, curriculum, and initiatives for the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We have one ENL teacher who attends all available professional development sessions from DOE that are applicable to elementary school students. Our classroom and out-of-classroom teachers demonstrate self-learning and self-motivated professional development by attending off-site workshops, seminars and conferences related to ELLs. Embedded in all of our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  professional development are strategies that would work for ELL students as well as others. When purchasing materials teachers are consulted so as to make sure that all students have the appropriate materials. 7.5 hours of of ELL training is provided for all staff members during Professional Development days and Faculty Meetings and cover topics such as Who is an ELL?; NYS ELL Identification Process; NYSITELL and NYSESLAT; Proficiency Levels; Testing and ELLs; Promotion Policy for ELLs; Second Language Acquisition; ENL Strategies; SIFE. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We have one ENL teacher who attends all available professional development sessions from DOE that are applicable to elementary school students. Our classroom and out-of-classroom teachers demonstrate self-learning and self-motivated professional development by attending off-site workshops, seminars and conferences related to ELLs. Embedded in all of our professional development are strategies that would work for ELL students as well as others. When purchasing materials teachers are consulted so as to make sure that all students have the appropriate materials. 7.5 hours of of ELL training is provided for all staff members during Professional Development days and Faculty Meetings and cover topics such as Who is an ELL?; NYS ELL Identification Process; NYSITELL and NYSESLAT; Proficiency Levels; Testing and ELLs; Promotion Policy for ELLs; Second Language Acquisition; ESL Strategies; SIFE. Teachers of ELLs attend all available professional development sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers of students transitioning into middle school contact the new school and provide them with necessary information about each ELL student. They try to arrange visitations for the students and their parents. Guidance councelor Ms. Broadnax and the ENL teacher provide staff with support to assist ELLs as they transition from one school to another. Applications (avilable in different languages) and information about the dates for Middle School orientations and announcements for Gifted and Talanted testing are distributed. We also provide information about district-wide Middle School Fairs. Teachers write recommendation letters for students. Guidance councelor and the ENL teacher ensure continuity of ENL services for ELLs as mandated. P.S. 401 meets the professional development requirements as per Part 154.2 by providing PDs to teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of ELLs. At least 15% of total PD hours are dedicated to language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. The ENL teacher Ms. Kuznetsova attends PDs provide by Brooklyn South ELL Support Team on a monthly basis. 50% of the ENL teacher PD hours cover language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction as well as best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  instruction for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P.S. 401 ensures that parents and guardians are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. Parents of ELLs attend Parent/Teacher Conferences as well as ELL Parent Orientations where parents meet the teachers and discuss their child's progress. During fall and spring Parent/ Teacher conferences parents of ELLs are strongly encouraged to visit the ENL room. The ENL teacher also visits each classroom of the students she services to remind the parents and teachers to visit the ENL room. Parents have an opportunity to communicate their concerns with the ENL teacher and review their child's work folder to get a better understanding of their child's needs and achievements. The school Leadership, our Parent Coordinator, SLT and PTA members invite parents/guardians of ELLs to attend workshops that address the educational needs of ELLs, make translators available, disseminate materials and notifications in the preferred language of communication to the parents/guardians, and provide information about needed support services. Our school provides translation services for ELLs' parents. All important notices are sent in the preferred language of communication. Letters are translated by school personnel, when necessary we will use the NYCDOE Translation Service Unit to translate our letters and notices into various languages spoken at P.S.12. We will have a translator from the Translation Unit on site to assist parents when necessary. We keep an updated list of available personnel who can assist with translation and interpretation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents including ELL parents take part in our parent involvement activities. When planning our parent involvement activities we survey and listen to our parents as how we can best serve their needs. We host a series of workshops conducted by the Parent Coordinator to support parents in understanding the curriculum. During these workshops parents are made aware of current data and are informed of student and parental expectations. Translators are available at all Parent/Teacher conferences, parent workshops and PTA meetings. Parents are constantly encouraged to become a member of our PTA in order to assist us in addressing their needs. Parents are invited to curriculum conferences to meet with their child’s teachers in order to learn academic expectations for the school year and how they could assist at home. Parents are proactive in creating school wide activities such as Common Core Learning and Barbecue, Family Movie Night, Family Game Night, Cool Culture, our annual dance festival, etc. In addition, parents are invited to Open School Week to observe instruction and get techniques that they can utilize at home. They are also invited to brunch with principal to discuss their concerns or ideas. Parents of ELLs are invited to class of the month luncheon whenever their children's class are the class of the month. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2018-19 SCEP-FL 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deon Mitchell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Christopher Avenue Community S School DBN: 23K401 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deon Mitchell Title Principal Debra Friday Assistant Principal Marie-Denise Jean Parent Coordinator Alla Kuznetsova ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ana Botero Kye Weaver Parent Teacher/Subject Area Jaqueline Regist Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Cassandra Broadnax School Counselor MiaTheresa Pate Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23K401 School Name: Christopher Avenue Community School Superintendent: Mauriciere deGo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Assessment of P.S. 401 written and oral interpretation is done primarily through the Home Language Survey form that is completed upon registration. We also use a few ATS reports to help to determine the translation and interpetation needs of parents in our school.These reports include the RHLA and RPOB. Though not all of our students are eligible for ENL instruction, we do keep a record of homes where English is not the primary language, so that translation and interpretation services are available to all parents who require them, and not just to parents of ELLs. Data is collected via ATS, students' emergency cards information and from conversations with parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language As a result of the data collected, it was discovered that parents' preference for oral and written communication were Spanish, and English. P.S. 401 will make every effort to ensure that written and oral translations are representative of the languages of our families. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families During the course of the school year P.S. 401 disseminates several documents to our parents. Many of these documents are translated to meet the needs of individual cultures represented here. Documents include but not limited to School Calendars, Open School/Parent Conference notifications,after school activities such as Curriculum Night, Trips, PTA/School Leadership Meetings. These notifications are sent at various times. Ex: Parent welcome letter, calendar will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  be sent at the beginning of the school year, etc. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our school will have the formal face-to-face meetings with parents throughout the school year: Meet theTeacher/Curriculum Night, Parent/Teacher conferences, IEP meetings. When necessary a translator will be provided to accommodate the meeting/conferences. Other informal meetings will include conversations with guidance councelor, attendance teacher, classroom teacher , as well as parent coordinator. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  All parents will be provided with information regarding their rights to have a translator if necessary as well as the procedures for attaining these services.P.S. 401 will fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 by determining within 30 days of a student's enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent of each student. If such language is not English, it is determined whether the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. We will maintain current records of the primary language in ATS, as well as on the student's Emergency Card. The school will continue to use all of the above translation options and selections. We will also post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign in Spanish, indicating the availability of interpretation services. We will also update our school safety plan, ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices due to language barriers. We will post and provide such forms in accordance with this section. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback will be gathered from parents and used in the improvement of the services and support provided to them. This will be done through parent surveys, one-on-one meetings, telephone conversations, and formal/informal meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 
