2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K403 School Name: ACADEMY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LEADERSHIP Principal: CHANTANDREA BLISSETT 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Academy for Environmental Leadership 333200011403 9-12 School Number (DBN): 32K403 400 Irving Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11237 (718) 381-7100, extension 5118 (718) 381-0223 Phone Number: Eric Newville Fax: Email Address: enewville@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): ChántAndréa Blissett Fortune Aupont AmarilisInfante Eric Newville Euris Arzeno ShaquilleBenn Reveena Ramotar Stehanie Mena, Make the Road NY, Inc. CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Brooklyn, New York 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 455-4635 Phone Number: ((917) 209-9674 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Field Services Support Center FSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Suite 501, Brooklyn, New York 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5782 Phone Number: (718) 935-4456 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Name ChántAndréa Blissett Fortune Aupont AmarilisInfante Andre Johnson Euris Arzeno ShaquilleBenn Reveena Ramotar *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Dana Brustmeyer CBO Representative, if applicable IfrainPonce Confesora Tejada Claudia Herrera-Enriquez Member/PTA Treasurer Member/ PTA Designated Vice President Member/ PTA Secretary 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sandra Solomon Eric Newville Kenny Olivo Maxyra Beato Member/UFT Member/ CSA(SLTChair) Member/ PTACorresponding Secretary Member/Student Member/Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? In alignment with our approach to teaching and learning is the Academy for Environmental Leadership (AEL) Vision, which seeks to ensure a better tomorrow by empowering students to become responsible leaders and caretakers of the Earth, including one another. As part of that vision, we strive to make students part of a global response towards preserving and sustaining our environment and all of humankind. Consequently, our curriculum is grounded in the sciences, math and the humanities. Students are provided with opportunities to see the relevance of their education within their own lives as members of the global community. Every student is held to the highest standard and is provided opportunities for intellectual engagement. Our instructional focus promotes students actively building on 2018-19 CEP 9  each others' ideas by asking questions and responding to each other during class discussions, as we expect all students to be college and career ready upon graduation. We welcome active parental involvement and family engagement, which is essential to the success of our school. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We have been focusing on putting the "L" in AEL by bringing in comprehensive student leadership and mentoring programs into our school. This work began last school year with Peer Group Connections (PGC) through the Center for Supportive Schools. During the summer of 2017, we selected 12 seniors and 1 junior who would serve the entire year as peer mentors to our freshmen and sophomores. These students underwent an intense training at a three day retreat, in September 2017, at the Greenkill YMCA with their two PGC facilitators. Afterwards, they met their small group of ninth graders during Activity Day in late September. Then, from October through June, the PGC Peer Leaders engaged in weekly outreaches (every Wednesday) with their small groups. During these outreaches, our Peer Leaders took their groups through lessons that were designed to help our ninth graders better acclimate to the high school experience. They engaged in activities that explored choices and making the right decisions in the face peer pressure and moments of temptation. They also focused on the purpose of showing up to school, on time, every day and helping to create a caring community, also goal setting and having a growth v. a fixed mindset. At the end of the 2017-2018 school year, we announced the need for a new group of seniors and juniors who would serve in a similar capacity to our incoming freshmen. In June 2018, students formally applied to become AEL's next set of PGC Peer Leaders, and they underwent a candidate vetting process complete with having to submit a formal application, essay and recommendations from their teachers, and they had to actively participate in a group interview before a panel of students and staff. These students underwent their Peer Leader training over the course of three days in August. This allowed them to meet and begin working with their freshmen groups on the first day of school. In addition to being in our second year of PGC, we have implemented another phase of mentoring that involves students and staff. The same organization that partners with us in our work around PGC is also helping us train 11 staff members who will serve this year as Achievement Mentors to our current tenth graders. These would be students who were on the receiving end of the PGC program last year as freshmen. The goal of Achievement Mentoring (AM) is to target up to 24 tenth graders who are struggling academically and/or behaviorally in school. The goal is to partner these students with an adult who will work with them throughout the school year, in order to provide the social and emotional, as well as academic (if possible), support the students need in order for them to be able to get and stay on track and have a productive school year. Other student leadership initiatives that have been in place at AEL include programs, like AVID (Advancement via Individual Determination) and our campus CBO, Make the Road NY, which trains select students from each school of the four schools on the campus to serve year-round as Youth Leaders. The Youth Leaders usually consist of 2-4 students from each school so our goal with bringing in partnerships like PGC and AM was done in an effort to build our capacity to develop more student leaders within our school. Additionally, this year we have entered into a partnership with Read Alliance, a program that is currently training approximately 10-11 of our students from all grades (ages 14-17) to help children in PS 151K (a nearby elementary school) to become strong readers. Once our students have completed their training this fall, they will begin working with the elementary schoolers in the spring and they will be considered Teen Leaders. This is a paid position. We are also pleased to report that we have one of our seniors serving on our Superintendent's Student Advisory Council (SSAC) this year. The SSAC's first meeting took place on October 29th. AEL's student representative shared her notes on the meeting with the Principal. She was selected for this opportunity because she submitted a compelling essay which was part of the application process to represent one's school. This student served on our Student Council 2018-19 CEP 10  last year and years prior. We plan to continue to tap our rising student leaders from entities in our school like AVID, our Student Council, the National Honor Society (NHS) and our sports teams. Our goal is to continue adding student leadership programs such as the aforementioned ones in as many areas as possible, including sports, the arts, community service and more in order to continue building student leadership. In turn, these experiences and opportunities should help to strengthen our students' skill sets and enhance their resumes which will prepare them for college and the world of work. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At the Academy for Environmental Leadership (AEL), we serve approximately 250 students, 40% are English Language Learners (ELLs) and 20% are students with individualized educational plans, or IEPs (also designated as students with disabilities). Therefore, a majority of our student population receives either language acquisition support or modified instruction to meet their learning needs. In addition to this, our campus is a co-located site and a community school. As such, we receive socio-emotional support from our primary community based organization, Make the Road, NY, Inc. and Interborough. Starting in 2018-2019, our campus will receive additional support through a health clinic so that our students can receive extensive medical care. We find that being a small, innovative learning community also requires that we utilize a highly collaborative approach to teaching and learning which yields tremendous benefits for our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Some areas where AEL has made the most growth is in building capacity in our staff that is focused on supporting students' socio-emotional growth, increasing the percentage of students who pass college-level courses by more than 5% and engaging teachers in at least four inquiry cycles that is informed by student outcomes on the Regents, classroom assessments (both formal and informal, including diagnostics that we will be implementing this year in ELA and math via LEXIA and ALEKS) to be conducted by Cohort (Inquiry) teams: KEY AREAS OF FOCUS FOR 2018-2019 As per last year's Principal's Performance Objective (PPO) visit, our key areas of focus for next year are as follows: 1) Pedagogy - (QR Indicator 1.2): Ensure that all instruction includes multiple entry points to support our high ENL population. Consider conducting PL around relevant task creation to promote more student engagement. Assessment should be re-evaluated school-wide to ensure there are frequent checks for understanding and that students are leaving classrooms with a clear path toward mastery of stated objectives. All objectives should be aligned to the language of DOK and should include the language of what students will do, how they will do it and how they will show mastery. The use of technology, via the incorporation of blended learning, should be considered for student engagement and differentiation. 2) Assessment - (QR Indicator 2.2): Consider professional learning on how to provide access to meet the needs of diverse learners; for example, differentiation strategies such as student choice, use of multiple resources, flexible grouping, tiering and more specifically reviewing UDL guidelines. Common assessment should be collaboratively developed so that every teacher has an understanding of what the expected learning outcomes for their students and a greater understanding of the curriculum. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K403 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 272 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 42 5 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 87.1% % Reduced Lunch 37.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 75.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.61 7% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 62% 47% 67.7% 6.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 78 64 79.0% 4.4% 22.8% 17.6% 3.7% 0.0% 4 26% 4.9 N/A N/A 76% 48% 75.6% 10% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, 86% of observations included Effective or Highly Effective ratings for Domain 3, which focuses on questioning and discussion techniques, student engagement and assessment. We have been integrating our instructional focus, which is on questioning, over the past four years. This, coupled with increased professional development and focused feedback for teachers, has led to more student-centered instruction, which has allowed for increased performance in ratings of teachers' pedagogy. This is evidenced by our increasing ratings in Domain 3, which can be viewed on ADVANCE. Our SLT analyzed this data, spoke to students and parents, Regents pass rates, surveys credit accumulation data and other sources of data. Moving forward, the SLT concluded that our priority need continues to be pedagogy and assessment, and increasingly student learning outcomes on formal, state-wide assessments like the Algebra and ELA Regents exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in at least 87% of observed lessons, teachers will be rated as Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching Domain 3 by incorporating best instructional practices to give students intellectual ownership over their own learning, implementing student-led discussions and having students monitor their own progress using self and peer assessment rubrics. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Frequent cycles of observations with actionable feedback. In addition to required observations, staff shall receive more frequent, formative "Snapshot" visits, with immediate, actionable, feedback tied directly to Domain 3. Instructional staff September 2018-May 2019. The administrative team. Largely teacher-led Professional Learning workshops will be conducted each week during our 80-minute afternoon Professional Learning sessions. The topics covered for these teacher-led workshops will be taken from teacher surveys, notes/minutes from our weekly teacher team meetings (i.e. department teams and cohort teams) and from speaking directly with teachers during 1:1 sessions with administrators about their specific teaching and learning needs. In-class coaching for new and struggling teachers by our school based mentors, and/or outside coaches. Teachers will receive at least one type of visit monthly. September 2018-May 2019 Instructional staff New and developing teachers. September 2018-May 2019 Teachers will share best practices for using questioning and discussion techniques, student engagement assessment, through inquiry teams, including cohort and department teams and engaging in Instructional Rounds. The instructional rounds will be specifically designed to address our problem of practice: Instructional staff and the administrative team. "Particularly at the end of the year, we sometimes see overly teacher-centric instruction and students that are disengaged, which is evidenced from students’ body language and a lack of work product being produced. Four rounds will occur during the school year, roughly every 8-10 weeks, starting in late October an ending in late May, early June. The Principal's Instructional Cabinet, select teachers and the administrative team. Mentors and district-wide PDs for new teachers offered by our superintendency, Generation Ready coach. All teachers will engage in a series of visits into each others' classrooms (2 rounds in the fall and 2 rounds in the spring). 2018-19 CEP 14 What are students being asked to do? What causes students to be engaged?" 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share our instructional focus, which is on student-centered learning, with all families and students. Teachers will reach out to families via a syllabus, Family Night, phone calls and parent teacher home visits to ensure that all students and families know what is expected of them. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors and Teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. (a) Administration will begin conducting observations in September and formal observations by September 2018 (b) Beginning in September 2018, mentors/teacher-leaders will conduct weekly PL workshops featuring best practices for the entire instructional staff; and (c) By February 1, 2019 in-house teacher surveys will be analyzed to inform the PIC on the development of the PL plan for the remainder of the school year. Feedback from these surveys, as well as the MOTP detail report from Advance, will be our mid-point benchmark that will indicate to us whether we are meeting Goal #1 as a school. In addition to this, the NYCDOE Advance web application which monitors teacher development and evaluation system and teacher surveys will be a valuable resource to assist us with monitoring our progress towards achieving this goal. In February, based on the data on the Advance system, administration will frequently visit and provide feedback to teacher team meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) During the 2017-2018 school year, we implemented the practice of conducting Instructional Rounds in the last two weeks of the school year. Our objective was to focus on one problem of practice around student engagement. Our SLT analyzed this data, spoke to students and parents, Regents pass rates, surveys credit accumulation data and other sources of data to evaluate this practice. Based on our analysis, we will continue this practice throughout the 2018-2019 school year. Additionally, the Advance web application provides charts and numerical data in each component area which will be of great assistance with tracking our progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? On this year's Principal's Performance Review (PPR), the learning environment was AEL's strength, because "the principal continues to offer activities to address student interest and promote student voice. The principal has shaped a learning environment that is a point of celebration given the number of opportunities students have to participate in shaping the school's culture. Students have several school spirit engagements throughout the year to participate in along with campus sport teams. Students are also in a revised student government and there are town halls for them to voice their concerns. Students engage in restorative practices for conflict and are celebrated throughout the year in a variety of forums especially for most improved attendance. In addition to celebrating students, parents and teachers are celebrated as well." We analyzed data from OORS, Student Perception Surveys, Learning Environment Surveys, our School Quality Guide, and anecdotal data from student leaders and Restorative Justice Team to look at our inclusion of student voice and leadership in our school. We found that we have been growing our leadership efforts through National Honor Society and the PGC-HS Peer Leader program, but also that there was a desire and need to further grow our students' leadership. This will help us create a more inclusive, student-driven, restorative, and supportive school, as per our vision. For the 2018-2019 school year, AEL will continue to promote student voice through the following initiatives: the National Honor Society, PGC-HS Peer Leader program, Achievement Mentoring where 10 staff members will be training during the school year to mentor 24 students who were mentored within this year's PGC-HS outreach by their upper class peer leaders, expanding our Student Council by having a student representative on our Superintendent's Student Advisory Council (SSAC), and continuing to have student representatives serve as Youth Ambassadors and Youth Leaders within our campus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 25% of staff will be engaged in a capacity building effort that is focused on supporting students' socio-emotional growth by engaging in Achievement Mentoring trainings (2 in the fall and 1 in the spring). 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create and sustain a school-wide Achievement Mentoring Program. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students who are chronically absent September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals and other staff members. Create and maintain a Programming Team of school staff members, to ensure that students' scheduling needs meet their academic and socio-emotional needs. School Staff September 2018 - June 2019 Continue to train and develop eleventh and twelfth grade student leaders mentoring incoming ninth graders via the second year of our partnership with Peer Group Connections, or PGC. Incoming ninth grade students September 2018-June 2019 Administration, and teacher leaders to be identified by administration and the Staff Development Committee Two teachers who will serve as the co-facilitators to ten eleventh and twelfth graders who will serve as AEL's PGC-HS Peer Leaders. Launch our new Parent Teacher Home Visit initiative over the summer and continue it as a vital part of our school culture throughout the school year. August 2018-June 2019 Parents, Teachers, CBO partners and administrators. Incoming ninth grade students, LTAs and chronically absent students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school community, our 2018-19 SBO vote moved in favor of moving the DOE designated May Parent Teacher Conference to February 2019 so that we can host a Family Night for our parents/families. This night will be designed to celebrate our students' accomplishments during the first half of the school year. In addition to this, Family Night will be an opportunity for our PGC-HS Peer Leaders to acclimate our ninth graders and their parents to the work that we will have conducted with them during the fall semester. Our PGC-HS teachers who will serve as co-facilitators for 2018-19 CEP 18  our Peer Leaders and our PGC-HS Site Coordinator will be responsible for reaching our families in order to get them involved and engaged in this night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use grants and school money, including our Community School/AIDP grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our Principal's Instructional Cabinet will monitor our progress over the course of the school year. Our mid-year benchmark will be a survey conducted of staff during Regents Week, approximately January 23, 2019. By January 23, 2019, at least 25% of staff will be engaged in a capacity building effort that is focused on supporting students' socio-emotional growth by engaging in at least two Achievement Mentoring trainings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will conduct a survey of staff which will tell us whether 25% (or a growing #) of staff members are serving in a role that serves to grow and support students' socio-emotional growth. It will also inquire as to what staff members need to make their socio-emotional outreach more effective and positively impactful on students and the school community. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. AEL received a rating of Well-developed in 1.4 (Learning Environment) and 4.2 (Teacher Teams) on this year's PPR. In order to ensure a continued growth and development in these areas, throughout 2018-2019, teachers will continue to meet on a weekly basis in team structures, i.e. Cohort (Inquiry) teams and Department teams meetings to collaborate on interdisciplinary units, curriculum design and to share best practices. According to our last School Quality Review and this year's PPR, our areas of focusis Indicator 2.2 - Assessment. In order to improve our rigorous instruction, we continue to improve our use of formative assessments, checks for understanding and data-driven inquiry work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will engage in at least four inquiry cycles that is informed by student outcomes on the Regents, classroom assessments (both formal and informal, etc), to be conducted in by Cohort (Inquiry) teams and a series of Instructional Rounds that focuses on the problem of practice surrounding student engagement. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive ongoing training conducting inquiry cycles, to be led by the Principal's Instructional Cabinet. The two questions that are being used to guide this work are: (1) What are students being asked to do? and, (2) What causes students to be engaged? Instructional Staff Teachers, Administration and the Principal's Instructional Cabinet (PIC). Four rounds of inquiry will be from roughly October-November, December-January, February-March, and April-May. We will restructure our Professional Development sessions in order to provide teachers more time and direction in engaging in an inquiry cycle. These sessions will include students, so that staff can hear directly from students in a qualitative manner. Instructional Staff September, 2018-June, 2019 Teachers, PIC and the Administrative Team. Teacher teams will schedule common assessments, so that we can obtain and measure data and the progress of our inquiry cycles in an organized and deliberate manner. Teacher Leads, Administration, PIC September, 2018 - June, 2019 The Principal's Instructional Cabinet, Teachers and the Administrative team. We will continue to structure Professional Development to be teacher-led and teacher driven. Instructional Staff September, 2018 - June, 2019 Teachers, PIC and the Administrative Team. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 21  Administration will collect/review the notes from inquiry teams as they engage in the cycle, and check-in weekly with the leaders of each group during weekly meetings. At each quarter, administration will ensure that each team is finishing a cycle, and restarting a new one. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The PIC will meet weekly, monitoring progress and suggesting modifications and improvements over the course of the school year. We will administer a survey by February 1, 2019, and evaluate it. We will adjust our progress based on this data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administration will measure with all teachers via a survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the feedback that we received throughout the 2017-18 school year, more students and families wish to receive college credit while still in high school. Our SLT analyzed this data, spoke to students and parents, Regents pass rates, surveys credit accumulation data and other sources of data to evaluate this practice. We are not pleased with our school's performance on the College and Career Readiness Index, as per the Student Achievement portion of the Framework for Great Schools; therefore, we continue to work towards moving this data in a more positive direction. We did find that our CCRI numbers increased in the 2017-18 school year, but that a majority of graduating seniors were still without college credit upon graduation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will continue to increase the percentage of students who pass college-level courses by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase the number of students who will take College Now classes, by having more students take pre-requisite exams earlier, and by recruiting earlier to students and families. Students in Grades 10-12 September 2018 - June 2019 Increase the number of students taking AP courses, by signing up more students and joining the AP for All Initiative, which will provide training, professional development and textbooks. All students in Grades 10-12 September 2018 - June 2019 Expanding our Summer Bridge programs, in order to provide students with more opportunities to pass Regents Exams earlier and take higher-level courses Incoming Ninth Grade Students September 2017 - June 2018 Building new partnerships with the LIU Early College Scholars and Medgar Evers Early College programs, in order to provide students with access to college campuses, college-level courses, and the opportunity to be counseled by college advisors and career counselors. All interested students who meet program's prerequisites. September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselors and College Now Coordinator Administration, Guidance Counselors and AP Teachers Administration, Guidance Counselors, Summer Teachers Administration, the superintendency and our Guidance Counselors. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will inform parents of all opportunities for students to take college-level courses. PTA Meetings will focus on college-level skills needed by families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principals, Attendance Team and Guidance Counselors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 24  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The SLT will monitor student sign-ups for college courses in September, 2018, and provide ideas and feedback towards improving course sign-ups. Using data from sign-up on January 31, 2018 as a mid-point benchmark, The SLT will check-in during the February meeting, to ensure sign-ups grow over the course of the school year. The programmer will provide data to the SLT at both of these meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The College and Career Course Index from the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has Strong Family-Community Ties, as measured by our 2016-2017 Quality Review and PPO. However, our student enrollment has been falling over the past few years, which we believe is due primarily to demographic trends in our neighborhood. This decreases the number and variety of programs that we are able to offer at our school. Our SLT has analyzed data from our surveys, SEMS, ATS and the New Visions Student Sorter on this topic. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the number of new students accepted into our school to at least 68, by using a team-approach to re-brand our school and improve our ties within the wider community and surrounding Queens area (i.e. Ridgewood, Corona and Glendale). 2018-19 CEP 26 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Local middle schools, businesses and community organizations Local community members Community Members July, 2018 -June, 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselors and the Recruitment Team September 2018 - June, 2019 Administration and the Recruitment Team September 2018 - June, 2019 Administration and the Recruitment Team August 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Parents, CBO members and administrators Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our Recruitment Team will visit and form deeper ties with middle schools, businesses and community organizations, by having students tutor and mentor younger students, and by hosting events on our school's campus for the wider community. We will participate in more events , like high school fairs and conduct Open Houses/School tours, and reach out to elementary/middle schools, and more. We will improve our Internet outreach, by creating and updating a new school website, Instagram feed, Twitter and Facebook page. Over the summer, our administrators, teachers and parents will engage in Parent Teacher Home Visits (PTHV) in an effort to better acclimate our new students and families to the AEL community. We will keep this effort up throughout the school year. Additionally, in the fall and spring of the school year, PTHVs will be conducted on students whose attendance is an issue. Incoming students, LTAs and chronically absent students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will utilize our families as ambassadors to the community, to share the work that is being done in our school, and leverage our work outside of our school community. Specifically, through the FACE office, several of our parents will be trained in the Basic Core Leader and the Emerging Leader Training programs scheduled to take place in October 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 27  Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, the PTA Executive Board, the Community Coordinator, Recruitment Team, the SLT and the PIC. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will continually monitor progress via our regular Recruitment Team meetings and our weekly PIC meetings. We will hope to be 80% of the way to our goal by the end of the Round 1 application process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure our progress using the Student Enrollment Monitoring System (SEMS). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are designated as English Language Learners with very low to basic English language skills, students with disabilities (SWDs) as well as students in general education who are level 1 and 2 in ELA are targets for academic intervention services. We also look at students' course grades, Regents grades, teacher recommendations, parent recommendations, and encourage students to self-select into these programs. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) We ensure that students who receive ELL services also receive ELA strategies from an English teacher who works collaboratively with an ELL teacher. We make sure that ENL teachers receive ELA strategy training. Students are grouped based on their academic needs. ELL students receive the required number of mandated minutes of ELL instructional time. We try to keep our class sizes low. We will also use Lexia, an online program, to help students improve their literacy skills. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ELL students receive at least the required number of mandated minutes of ELL instructional time. We try to keep our class sizes low. Students will be moved to the least restrictive environment whenever possible. Other students will receive small-group tutoring during lunch and after-school, as needed, in small groups or on a 1-to-1 basis. Additionally, students in 9th grade with low-literacy skills will be placed in a literacy-focused class. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students receive informal reading and math assessments upon entering the school. Some students have additional instructional time built into the day. Tutoring is provided during lunch. We will encourage targeted students, based on teacher recommendations and assessment data, to participate. In addition, we offer an additional hour of tutoring after school in ENL and the other three major content areas (Math, Science and Social Studies) after-school. We also encourage new 9th graders to attend an ELAsummer bridge class in the summer 2018-19 CEP 29  Mathematics Science between 8th and 9th grade. All other students are encouraged to attend summer school to work on their academicskills. Students needing additional attention are taught in one-to-one groups after school or during lunch. Students are given additional instructional time built into the day. All students are encouraged to attend summer school to work on their academicskills. Students are given extra instruction during the school day. All students are encouraged to attend summer school to work on their academicskills. Students are grouped based on their academic needs, as evidenced by standardized testing, school-created assessments and informal observations. ELL students are given instruction and resources in their native language as well as English. We will also use Aleks, an online program, to help students improve their mathematics skills. Students are grouped based on their academic needs, as evidenced by standardized testing, school-created assessments and informal observations. Students are taught in small homogeneous groups and given additional class time with their classroom teacher to obtain skills from prior grade levels. Students will be moved to the least restrictive environment whenever possible. Students are taught in small homogeneous groups, and given additional class time with their classroom teacher to obtain skills from prior grade levels. ELL students are given instruction and resources in their native language as well as English. Students will be moved to the least restrictive environment whenever possible. Students who are designated as English Language Learners with very low to basic English acquisition skills, students with disabilities (SWDs) as well as students in general education who are level 1 and 2 in mathematics are targets for academic intervention services.We also look at students' course grades, Regents grades, teacher recommendations, parent recommendations, and encourage students to self-select into these programs. Students who are designated as English Language Learners with very low to basic English acquisition skills, students with disabilities (SWDs) as well as students in general education who are level 1 and 2 in ELA are targets for academic intervention services.We also look at students' course grades, Regents grades, teacher recommendations, parent recommendations, 2018-19 CEP 30 We will also use Lexia, an online program, to help students improve their literacy skills. Students are grouped based on their academic needs, as evidenced by standardized testing, school-created assessments and informal observations. Students are taught in small homogeneous groups, and given additional class time with their classroom teacher to obtain skills from prior grade levels. Students are given extra instruction during the school day. All students are encouraged to attend summer school to work on their academicskills. ELL students are given instruction and resources in their native language as well as English. Students will be moved to the least restrictive environment whenever possible. We will also use Lexia, an online program, to help students improve their literacy skills. Meet for counseling as per students’ IEPs and as per recommendations of counselors and/or other staff. Meet for counseling as per students’ IEPs and as per recommendations of counselors and/or other staff. Meet for counseling as per students’ IEPs and as per recommendations of counselors and/or other staff. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) and encourage students to self-select into these programs. Students who are designated as English Language Learners with very low to basic English acquisition skills, students with disabilities (SWDs) as well as students in general education who are level 1 and 2 in ELA are targets for academic intervention services.We also look at students' course grades, Regents grades, teacher recommendations, parent recommendations, and encourage students to self-select into these programs. Students with IEPs that mandate they receive group or individual counseling services from their Guidance Counselor. Other students in need of counseling interventions are identified by school staff members, families and the students thesmelves, and then referred to their Guidance Counselor and from there the school Social Worker if further counseling 2018-19 CEP 31  measures are needed. Healing Arts Initiative, Make the Road NY and the Community Schools Grant partnership program will provide social workers to work with our students. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have many students living in temporary housing (which are not necessarily documented or officially reported on DOE systems). Many of these students are living with extended family members and/or in the homes of family friends. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 CEP 33  Throughout the year, these students are provided basic emergency supplies, such as school supplies, books, and more as well as other educational services, like counseling services, intervention program so these students have every opportunity to progress academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Attendance at high school hiring fairs and hiring halls.  Web based recruitment for job openings when applicable.  Emphasis on teacher collaboration, curriculum creation,  Additional training to teach Advanced Placement classes, team teaching, focusing on the six approaches to co-teaching in an ICT setting.  Opportunities for elective class creation.  Staff participation in school based decision making process, i.e. the Staff Development Committee (SDC) meets monthly as well as monthly COSEA meetings (COMMITTEE ON SPECIAL EDUCATION ACCOUNTABILITY TEAM) which consists of the Principal, the Assistant Principals, all four Special Education teachers, two General Education teachers and the School Based Support Team (SBST).  Monthly common planning time for departments  Outside Professional Development opportunities that teachers can attend with the approval of administration.  100% of the staff will participate in a professional development workshop series that is conducted by their peers (including our Peer Collaborative Teacher and school-based mentors, effective and highly effective teachers in certain teaching component areas, our ENL/Special Education certified teachers, administration and guest presenters) designed to build awareness and understanding of best classroom practices and instruction that is aligned to the Common Core and models “Effective” and “Highly Effective” teaching as measured by the “Danielson Framework for Teaching Components.” 2018-19 CEP 35   With 100% of the staff, the Principal/APs will use that Danielson rubric to facilitate individual and group conversations around classroom practice.  The Principal and Assistant Principals will conduct at least 4 observation conversations for each teacher using the “Danielson Rubric: Adapted to New York Department of Education Framework for Teaching Components” to provide feedback.  100% of the staff will participate in weekly professional development workshops during our 80-minute Professional Learning periods on Mondays from 2:35-3:55 PM.  Our staff has already received training on how to analyze student work using specific tuning protocols and will continue to receive regular training over the course of the year on this process during our in-house professional learning workshop series. We will discuss the expectations of the Common Core and compare where students’ work is now as compared to where it will be expected to be. We will then provide professional. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  To enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCLS), the school developed a professional learning plan that is targeted to meet teachers’ needs.  Teachers meet 1 time per month to plan in their content areas (by department).  Teachers meet 1 time per month in inquiry/cohort teams to discuss the implementation of interventions and to create targeted goals for subgroups of students.  Teachers use Skedula (PupilPath) and the New Visions Data Sorter as a data source for their planning and inquiry teamwork.  Teachers participate in targeted teams in the tenure track meeting with the lead teacher, the new teacher meetings with their school-based mentor/coach, the Special Education/C.O.S.E.A. meeting with administration, ELL meeting with administration, and in targeted professional development workshops that focus on specific Domains/Components areas of the “Danielson Framework for Teaching.”  The Principal and Assistant Principals participate in targeted professional development, i.e., informal observations, targeted feedback to teachers, etc., with the Network Instructional Coach every 2 weeks and with the Network Talent Coach quarterly.  The Principal and Assistant Principals participate in Network monthly professional development workshops specifically designed to address CCLS, Advance and the new evaluation system under the Teaching Components . Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 36  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Administration and each department/cohort teacher lead meets on a weekly basis as the Staff Development Committee to plan our weekly Professional Learning sessions and to discuss the needs as well as the progress and advancements in instruction via Cohort and Department teams. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 CEP 37 Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) $243,110 0 13,774 0 2,541,786 Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A N/A N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 9; 11; 14 N/A N/A 9; 11; 14 9; 11; 14; 16; 18 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP 38   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Academy for Environmental Leadership, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Academy for Environmental Leadership] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Academy for Environmental Leadership , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 2018-19 CEP 42  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Students receive assistance with college enrollment and the financial application process at our CBO's Student Success Area. Also, this year we had a few students who were taking online classes be able to work in the S-Area with an adult who was their to provide the guidance and support that was needed. However, for the 2018-19 school year, we have asked that they assist us more directly with attendance work, in order to improve our students' achievement rates. This connection between attendance and achievement is a result of our work with the Community School Team, SLT, and reviewing data from course passage rates, attendance, Regents passage rates, and student, teacher, and parent surveys. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, our attendance rate will increase by at least 1%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The assistance that our CBO is able to offer us with each of these areas will go a long way towards assisting us with making sure that our students are successfully passing their classes, that they feel supported by at least one adult in the building to whom they might need to reach out to during a crisis and it will provide the families as well as the school with another layer of accountability to make sure that no child slips through the cracks because s/he was not supported in each of these areas. They will assist with parent outreach, counseling and other initiatives for Tier I, Tier II and Tier III attendance supports. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Make the Road, NY, Inc. Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Students who are experiencing crisis/trauma, LTAs and chronically absent Members will provide counseling support, engage in our Parent Teacher Home Visit program and update us regularly as to the progress and intervention steps being taken with each Our goal for the 2017-18 school year was to increase our students' attendance rate by 5%. Unfortunately, we did not hit this goal. We will continue to work towards reaching an 85% percentage rate 2018-19 CEP 47  Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) or Peer Group Connections - High School (PGC-HS) Incoming ninth graders student on their caseload. during the 2018-19 school year. Members of this partnership began training our staff to train our eleventh and twelfth grade peer leaders/mentors to mentor our incoming ninth graders and tenth graders. For the 2018-19 school year, two more teachers will be trained to work with select students who will serve as peer leaders to our incoming ninth graders. The students who received peer leader mentoring this year had the highest attendance rate percentage. For the 2018-19 school year, we will continue to monitor the impact that this program is having not only on students' attendance but their academic progress as well. Interborough Students who are LTAs, chronically absent and/or in crisis. This partner works closely with our students to provide the counseling support that they need to stay focused on their academic goals. Overall, the students who underwent counseling this year were able to make some strides academically and with their attendance. However, more needs to be done during the upcoming school year to measure the specific gains that students are making as a result of this service. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our Community School partners, Make the Road, NY along with our support CBOs, Interborough and Center for Supportive Schools will be invaluable in this work. They will work closely with our teachers, students and administrators to ensure that we have everything that we need to provide expanded learning, attendance support/monitoring, counseling services and restorative justice supports and interventions whenever students need it. 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E SIG Grant School X Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The Lead CBO, Make the Road NY, Inc. will work closely with AEL by checking in regularly (weekly and/or monthly, as needed) in order to monitor the impact that the services that they are providing are students. This will entail that they share data with us in real-time so that we will be able to put the necessary interventions in place. They will continue to assist us with our families by joining us on our Parent Teacher Home Visits. Usually, MRNY, Inc. plans and executes the annual community school forum for our campus. We always encourage our students, parents and teachers to attend. This year, we will do more to make sure that the information for this event is provided to members of our school community very early in advance to ensure greater attendance. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Make the Road NY, Inc. (MRNY) is our lead CBO. Their work will be instrumental to improving our school's overall attendance rate. This year, we end at a year-to-date attendance percentage of 79%. Our goal is to increase this % by 3-5% for the 2018-19 school year. In order to do this, a representative from MRNY will meet with our Attendance team during 3rd period, every Thursday. it is at these meetings where the data on the New Visions data sorter is 2018-19 CEP 49  reviewed and intervention steps are discussed, divided up and updates concerning these intervention measure are shared, analyzed for effectiveness, tweaked where necessary and monitored. Along with Interborough's in-house Social Workers, MRNY's counselors and Social Worker interns will provide counseling services to our students with severe and chronic attendance issues as well as students who are in crisis. MRNY has also offered their services to assist us with providing after school academic enrichment to our students who are struggling to advance due to difficulties that they have acquiring English proficiency, passing their classes and/or Regents exams. The specifics concerning this academic support is still being fleshed out. Lastly, our partnership with CSS and PGC-HS will continue for a 2nd year. Their support pushes directly into the classroom. Under CSS's direction, we will be training a group of eleventh and twelfth graders to provide weekly outreaches to students in the ninth grade. These weekly outreaches touch on issues yielding from cyber-bullying, peer pressure, self-advocacy and overall decision-making. Lastly, CSS will come in to our school twice in the fall and once in the spring to train 10 staff members in Achievement Mentoring. The nature of this program is to have these 10 staff members serve as mentors to 24 of our tenth graders who experienced peer mentoring from juniors and seniors in their ninth grade year. The 10 Achievement Mentors will take 2.4 tenth graders under their wing and be the adult in the building (besides their Guidance Counselors and coaches) that they can go to for academic and socio-emotional support. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The resources needed to implement the CS program will including AEL in the grant that CSS receives through the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP). This grant will cover the majority of the cost for the Achievement Mentoring program. The remainder of the cost (approximately $12,585) will be paid for through Community Schools Attendance Intervention and Dropout Prevention (AIDP) grant. The human resources that we will need are as follows: 2 teachers who will serve as co-facilitators to the 10 student peer leaders for PGC-HS, 10 staff members who will be trained by CSS personnel to become Achievement Mentors, our Community School co-Director and the Community Director will work closely with us on a weekly and monthly basis to ensure that the expanded learning time, counseling services and family outreach that will take the form of Parent Teacher Home Visits is yielding positive outcomes for students, families and staff alike. Approximately 12 of our staff members underwent PTHV training this year and they are prepared to engage in this form of outreach, along with 1-2 members of our lead CBO in the coming school year. This family engagement strategy will support us with increasing student attendance. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. We plan to start the school year strong with training for the teachers who will serve as co-facilitators for the PGC-HS program. This training will take place in July. Then, in August our 10 Peer Leaders and 2 PGC-HS advisors (or co-facilitators) will attend a 3-day retreat at the YMCA, located in Greenkill, NY so that they are prepared to start reaching out to our ninth graders in September. The PGC-HS outreaches will take place on a weekly basis and will run from September 2018 to May 2019. The students will also coordinate several community-wide outreaches throughout the school year: one to our staff members, one to parents and students in the form of Family Night and ideally 2 Activity Days for the ninth grade cohort. The Achievement Mentoring (AM) trainings will take place two times in the fall and once in the spring, but the work that the AM staff members do with their 24 tenth graders will start in September 2018-June 2019. The counseling support for students with severe attendance issues and/or in crisis that we receive from our lead CBO (MRNY, Inc.) and Interborough is also slated to start in September 2018 (October the latest) and last through June 2019. In addition to this, a member(s) of MRNY, Inc. will attend our weekly Attendance Team meetings and they will also participate in our monthly (for now) Parent Teacher Home Visit outreaches. 2018-19 CEP 50  Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: As of December 2016, we have 6 Entering students, 25 Emerging students, 30 Transitioning students and 41 Expanding students. The Academy for Environmental Leadership’s ENL program falls under the umbrella of the English Department with ENL standalone classes offered for all ENL students who are Entering and/or Emerging. Students are scheduled to receive the mandated number of instructional minutes based on NYSESLAT proficiency levels. Entering & Emerging ENLs, for example, receive standalone ENL, taught by an ESOL-certified teacher. All ENL students receive one period daily, of at least 45 minutes, of integrated ENL/ELA, co-taught by an ELA-certified teacher and ESOL-certified teacher. Additionally, all entering students receive one period daily of ENL/Social Studies, co-taught by a social studies-certified teacher and ESOL-certified teacher. (1) Entering and Emerging students will receive an additional 120 minutes of basic English Language/enrichment work regardless of academic grade level. Students will be grouped by the level of English proficiency rather than grade designation. Our After School classes will contain a total of 37 students (9th and 10th grade Entering & Emerging ENLs) who need additional support. They will meet two times per week after school for 60 minutes each time from 2:45 - 3:45 PM on Wednesdays & Thursdays from December 2016 to June 2017. During this class they will use specific texts and/or technology-based projects (conducted on iPads and/or laptops) that focuses on listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. There will be a total of 42 hours/21 weeks of instruction. The rationale for the program is for our Entering and Emerging students to receive direct instruction on developing their English speaking, reading and writing skills. In addition, our ENL teachers report that several of our Entering and Emerging ENLs are SIFEs (Students with Interrupted Formal Education) and as a result they possess low literacy as well as numeracy in their native language of Spanish and Arabic, which presents even greater challenges with students acquiring these skills in English. These classes will occur for the duration of the school year. (2) 11th and 12th graders, who have not yet shown proficiency in English, will be directed into enrichment reading and writing workshop classes.. This program will begin on December 2016, and will last until June 2017. These classes will meet two times per week after school for 60 minutes each time from 2:45 - 3:45 PM on Mondays & Fridays to a total of 20 students. The activities will focus on essay writing, i.e. document-based question essay responses, active reading (using reading protocols where students underline and/or highlight key words, phrases while they ask questions and make comments in the margins of the text), textual responses/analysis and multiple choice skills as they relate to reading passages, charts, graphs and political cartoons. This class will be taught by our ENL-certified teacher who works largely with our 11th and 12th grade ELLs. Every student will be working on a laptop computer to 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information complete the majority of their tasks and activities with the aide of the ESL/English teacher who will be there to provide direct instruction. Students receive team-teaching for ELA by an ESOL-certified teacher and an ELA-certified teacher. Additionally, students who are entering or emerging will also receive social studies co-taught by an ESOL and Social Studies certified teacher. During this class, students will use specific language building tools to aide them in the development of their English language skills. One technological program, called ThinkCERCA ("ThinkCERCA’s literacy platform is built around self-paced and collaborative learning, freeing teachers to truly personalize instruction for individuals and small groups. Lessons are differentiated for each learner’s readiness level so teachers can challenge and inspire students with “just right” texts and tasks.") is designed to assist our ENL teachers with building literacy skills. In addition, to assist our teachers who will be designing the curriculum for this after school ENLs Enrichment program, this technological tool contain lesson plans and quizzes that focuses on students' academic language use. Students are grouped by their grade levels, cohort levels and ENL levels, as indicated by the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. Additionally, students are grouped based on parental preference for TBE or ENL programs. Records are maintained via STARS and ATS, including records for attendance. Parents receive notifications via letters sent home, that have been translated into students' home languages. Records are maintained in the school (Room 208). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: For the 6 content area teachers to be successful working with the ENLs during the After School program, their professional development is critical. Therefore, our two ENL teachers will meet with the 6 content area teachers every day during 5th period for Common Planning (for 47 minutes) the entire week before we begin our After School Program (which is the first week in December). In addition, the 6 content teachers will continue to meet during 5th period during Common Planning (for 47 minutes) and/for on Tuesdays during their Other Professional Work Period (for 30 minutes) a minimum of one time a week during the 21 weeks of the After School Program so that they can continue to strategise with the two ENL teachers. Any additional planning sessions that the 5 teachers agree to will take place on an as needed basis. Topics to be covered (which has begun and will continue throughout this year): 2018-19 CEP 54  Part C: Professional Development A) Constructing lessons/unit plans with ENL teaching and learning strategies that will assist the 6 content area teachers with instruction, delivery and assessment from September 2016 until May 2017. B) Fixed & Growth Mindset for all ENLs (September 2016 -May 2017 approximately 10 sessions for the year): It is defined as: "In a fixed mindset, people believe their basic qualities, like their intelligence or talent, are simply fixed traits. They spend their time documenting their intelligence or talent instead of developing them. They also believe that talent alone creates success — without effort. They’re wrong. In a growth mindset, people believe that their most basic abilities can be developed through dedication and hard work—brains and talent are just the starting point. This view creates a love of learning and a resilience that is essential for great accomplishment. Virtually all great people have had these qualities." Teachers providing PD will be attending workshops provided by the Department of English Language Learners, and given coverages to attend these. Additionally, Anthony Pizzillo, Director of English Language Learners, Brooklyn North Field Support Center, has provided professional development for our whole staff, and we will be reaching out to his office to provide further trainings. The qualification of the providers of the above PDs are all ESOL-certified supervisor and/or teachers (Nilda Gomez-Katz, Emily Tugwell, Morgan McGuire, Alexander Rosario, and Anthony Pizzillo). Sign-In Sheets and Agendas are maintained by the Principal's Secretary in Room 421A. These trainings occur on Mondays from 2:35 - 3:55 (September 2016 - June 2017) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parent Coordinator, a certified Spanish translator and interpreter, will target the parents of our ELL students during our monthly Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings in order to offer them workshops designed to build their understanding of what the school is doing to provide their child with an education that will prepare them for college and a career. The Parent Coordinator is conducting his first workshop on Career & College Readiness to the parents of our Juniors & Seniors on November 19th (from 6:00 to 8:00 PM). A NYC DOE Interpreter will be in attendance to ensure that our Spanish speaking parents are served in their native language. This workshop is designed expressely for the parents of our ELLs because the sentiment amongst too many of our ELLs and their families is that their child will not be able to attend college because of their English deficits and/or their immigration status. Additional workshops that will be offered in the late fall/early spring and will target the parents of our ELLs are: 1) Accessing & Understanding Skedula/PupilPath - December 2016 2) Understanding Regents Examinations & How Can We Help at Home to Support our Children - February 2017 6:00 - 8:00 PM; 2018-19 CEP 55 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 3) How to Manage & Support our Youngsters at Home: Best Strategies for Helping my Child at Home - March 26, 6:00 - 8:00 PM. Our Parent Coordinator and our Community Liaison, who both conduct our PTA meetings, are bilingual and provide translation for the majority of our parents who attend the PTA meetings who only speak Spanish, along with a DOE Interpreter who is called in specifically for our monthly PTA meetings. Records, including agendas, attendance and copies of invitations, are stored by the Parent Coordinator in Room 412A. Parents were notified via phone calls home, emails, and written letters, which are mailed home. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL .00 _____ .00 .00 $.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Academy of Environmental Leadership Borough Brooklyn School Number 403 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal ChántAndréa Blissett Coach Anthony Pizzillo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alexander Rosario/ENL Teacher/Subject Area TBD Teacher/Subject Area Beth Heuer Related-Service Provider Carmen Sofia Gomez, Counselor Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Nilda Gomez-Katz Coach Natale Mannino School Counselor Carmen Sofia Gómez Parent Naftali Dawson Parent Coordinator TBD Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Elaine Baptiste, Attendance Te C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 259 Total number of ELLs 108 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 41.70% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-17 K 0 1 4 3 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? AEL used the Gates-MacGinitie assessment to assess students' literacy and writing skills. This information will be cross-referenced with NYSESLAT scores for programming purposes and to guide instruction for teachers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ENL Team, along with our Speech Teacher, analyze student data regularly, and share out their findings and teaching suggestions with our school during our Inquiry Team Meetings and whole staff meetings. Part of this team, for example, participated in the "Advancing Thinking Through Writing," an 18-hour course, which provided the research and theory supporting the Hochman Method, as well as evidence-based strategies for teaching expository writing. Our teachers who 2018-19 CEP 58  attended this course were provided with the support they needed to implement the Hochman Method in their classrooms. Teachers incorporated the strategies and materials into their curricula based upon their students’ needs during the year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review NYSESLAT data; Regents data; Spanish Lab; Gates MacGinitie Assessments; students' semester grades; supervisor observations; department/cohort Inquiry teams on a weekly basis review data/progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teacher teams meet regularly (several times per week) during common planning to collaborate, write, and execute lesson/unit plans once the summative data has been gathered. Additionally, we have an after-school tutoring program, specifically designed for ELL students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the response of the latest NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data, students are progressing on average about one level each year on the NYSESLAT. Many students arrive unable to speak any English and can not answer any questions on the NYSITELL. According to the Spanish Lab, many of our students are not fully literate in their native language. Thus the growth they make on the NYSESLAT shows improvement from the point of arrival. Data shows that our recent arrivals progress faster than our long term ELLs. This is because as students become more Advanced in English it becomes more difficult to pass to the Proficient level on the NYSESLAT. In addition, teachers analyze the Regents data results and investigate which tasks were most challenging for most students or for a cluster of students. For example, if the data of a specific test shows that a cluster of students are having difficulty with part 3, then teachers create lessons that concentrate on part 3 of the Regents. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Staff Development Committee (SDC) team disseminates information to our staff. Additionally, the ENL Team shares findings with staff teams during their regularly scheduled meetings. Our school hosts regular departmental meetings to share important findings about our ELL population. We develop activities and tasks that can be practiced / exercised across all content-courses. We then host staff developmental meetings to share tasks, skill-based activities and best practices concerning ELLs so that teachers can apply cross content connections. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Entering and Emerging students are grouped together into standalone ENL classes. All other ENL instruction occurs through integrated ENL, which is either team-taught by an ENL teacher and a content-area teacher, who taught by a dual-certified teacher. These classes are heterogeneous. Our integrated teaching contains a mix of proficiency levels. Our 9 th and 10 th grade ENL classes are graded, while our 11 th and 12 th grade classes are not. 2018-19 CEP 59  b. TBE program. If applicable. We have a bilingual-math teacher who is in the process of obtaining her certification. She is teaching a TBE math class. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school is fully aligned with the Part 154 Programming requirements. The guidance counselors verify that each student is in classes that match their ENL status, by reviewing data from ATS and STARS. However, if a student is found to be lacking his/her mandated instructional minutes, we make prompt corrections to ensure that his/her needs are addressed as quickly as possible. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For our students in ENL classes, content area classes include differentiation for students who require second language acquisition skills. These teachers have a range of scaffolding and strategies to provide support to English language learners. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are provided with translated copies of exams, glossaries, and are given extended time on their summative assessments in their content area classes. In addition, students are provided with translated copies of the classroom tasks, content keywords and important concepts in the content they would need to know for testing of all sorts. Google Classroom resources that help students immediately translate in any language so that they can continue on with their task. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our SIFE students are given extra tutoring and remediation in basic literacy skills upon entering the school, which they retain throughout their time in our school, unless they show that they are approaching average grade-wide proficiency in English and in content area classes. b. Newcomer ELL students are given at least three classes of ENL instruction. Using Title III money, they receive additional support in English via after school tutoring. They are also encouraged to attend academic remediation and tutoring during the school day. c. Developing students receive many of the supports that newcomer students do, but are weaned off of some of the supports in their home language and are given more exposure to other students and staff who do not speak their home language. d. Long Term ELL students are given extra remediation and support. Additionally, they may be evaluated to see if they require special education services. e. Former ELL students are given at least 90 minutes of addition integrated ENL classes and testing accommodations that are allowed for English Language Learners. f. Students are given different entry-points based on the same theme. The entry-points are based on a variety of skills and leveled learning that offer students many options on how to disperse their acquired knowledge. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 2018-19 CEP 60  Our teachers use additional scaffolding, supports in native language, translated materials, heterogeneous groupings and providing additional time and tutoring to these students. They monitor students' goals and accommodations on SESIS, for SWD. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students that are ELL-SWD are programmed for both classes. Our guidance counselors ensure that these students are properly programmed in the least restrictive environment, as per their IEP. As needed, students may have alternate placement paraprofessionals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ENL teachers push-in to a variety of content area classes. Our school provides professional development directly related to language proficiency and support students literacy skills. Teachers conduct inter-visitations, co-plan, share instructional plans and data via Google Drive, meet in teams to share best practices and review student data in order to better serve our students. We provide tutoring after school and during school, as well as summer programs for English Language Learners. We have brought in Instruction Leads from the Field Support Center to conduct Professional Development and lead a Professional Learning Community, focused on rigor. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering bringing in more CBO partners to work with our ELL students and families after school to help them improve their English proficiency. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are eligible to participate in all school programs. ENL teachers push-in to classes to ensure that students are able to be involved in all classes. Tutoring and other programs take place during and after school for ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use ThinkCerca and NewsELA to provide support for our ELL students. Students use online dictionaries/glossaries, Google Translate and computers to help them work on their English Language Proficiency. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We ensure that students who are entering and emerging receive standalone periods of ENL support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our guidance counselors review data from ATS and SESIS to ensure that all students are receiving required services and supports. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use ThinkCerca and Newsela to provide support for our ELL students. Students use online dictionaries/glossaries, iPads and computers to help them work on their English Language Proficiency. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 CEP 61  Our new ELL students participate in Summer Bridge, where they and their families come to the school to meet key staff and begin to work on learning English. New students throughout the year work with the Language Proficiency Team to become acclimated to the school and enroll in ENL activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are able to take LOTE (French), and English electives during school and after school through our online courses and via Title III funding. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our teacher-led Staff Development Committee ensures that all school staff receive training in teaching ELLs. Throughout the year, we regularly weave in differentiation strategies for ELL, rules about regulations and testing of ELL students and ways to assist students in increasing their English proficiency. All staff attend teacher-led and directed professional development in the school throughout the year. Additionally, our ENL teachers are sent to relevant professional development that is provided by the Department of Education's Office of English as a New Language. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our staff provides support during Summer Bridge to students and their families as they increase their English language proficiency. Our school has brought in an outside expert to help staff understand the needs of English Language Learners and how they can improve their instruction to best meet these students' needs. Our Staff Development Committee ensures that much more than 15% of total professional learning hours are focused on teaching ENL. Our ENL and bilingually certified teachers also obtain additional professional development outside of the school. The Principal's secretary saves all agendas and attendance forms. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school schedules regular meetings with the parents of ELL students to discuss student growth. Our ENL teachers are bilingual, and are able to conduct the meetings in Spanish, which is predominantly the language of our ELL families. We have 2018-19 CEP 62  other staff members who speak Arabic, the third-most prominent language in our school, and have hired paid translators for Urdu, as well as other less-common languages, when needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL parents are highly involved in our school's PTA. Our PTA meetings always include a Spanish translator. We hold regular meetings for our parents of ELL students. Additionally, OACE and our CBO partner Make the Road NY provides programs especially for parental involvement, including ENL classes for parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 63 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Chantandrea Blissett, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 64  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Academy for Environmental Lead School DBN: 32K403 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) ChántAndréa Blissett Title Principal Nilda Gomez-Katz Assistant Principal Victor Lopez Parent Coordinator Emily Tugwell ENL/Bilingual Teacher Naftali Dawson Parent Alexander Rosario/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Roberts-Bacchus/Earth Anthony Pizzillo Natale Mannino Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach CarmenSofia Gomez School Counselor Karen Watts N/A Jennifer Molloy Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Related-Service Provider Elaine Baptiste Other Attendance Teacher N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K403 School Name: Academy for Environmental Leadershi Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the following data sources & methodologies to assess our school's written translation & oral interpretation the needs of the school: -Adult Information Report (RADL) to determine the language dominance of the parent -Feedback from parents at parent/teacher association (PTA) meetings -Feedback from parent coordinator & other school personnel -Feedback from students -Skedula (PupilPath) provides automatic translation of all documents that are emailed to families 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 66  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese Chinese, Mandarin Chinese, English, Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Report Cards - Six times a year, at the end of each marking period. Progress Reports - Six time a year, at the middle of each marking period. Regents Exam Schedules - in January and June. Letters that the Department of Education requests to be backpacked home (on an as-needed basis). School Calendar - In the beginning of the year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 67  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conferences occur as scheduled by the Department of Education. Summer Bridge for new parents during the week of August 31 st . Annual reviews, Triennial reviews and IEP Meetings. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, our faculty receives training on targeted Chancellor's Regulations A-663 as well as other regulations that are important to review and keep in mind. The staff also receives a digital Staff Handbook for the the staff to review and refer throughout the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) These documents are posted. All new parents are shown and/or given copies of these documents and information about how to receive translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator and administration will gather feedback from the PTA Executive Board, from students and families at SLT Meetings, families during PTA meetings and from informal conversations with families. 2018-19 CEP 68 
