2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K445 School Name: NEW UTRECHT HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MAUREEN GOLDFARB 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information New Utrecht High School 20K445 332000011445 9-12 1601 80th Street 718-232-2500 School Number (DBN): 718-265-8227 Phone Number: Marisa Martinelli Fax: MMartin40@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Maureen Goldfarb Marisa Garcia Linda Walters Marisa Martinelli Linda Walters James Brishetta N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 20 Mr. Michael Prayor Superintendent: Kingsborough Community College Campus Superintendent’s Office Address: 2001 Oriental Blvd. Brooklyn, NY 11235 MPrayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-368-8515 Phone Number: 718-368-8517 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  BrooklynSouth FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Mauriciere Degovia Executive Director: 415 89th St., Brooklyn MDegovia@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-765-0605 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maureen Goldfarb MarissaGarcia Linda Walters Linda Walters James Brischetta Nora Hidra Josephine Tornabene *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Mandy Tse Jasmina Gajovich-Prolich Marisa Martinelli Domenico Zambito Danielle Vingelli Clement Tian NathalyWarner N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of New Utrecht High School is to hold our students to the highest standards and to educate all students to their maximum potential. To reach this end, we will offer a full academic program designed to meet and exceed new State standards. The thrust of our efforts will involve a continued rigorous program of staff development, enrichment of all student programs and a meaningful partnership with parents and community. Our curricula will be driven by the needs of our students, ensuring every student a quality education. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As a neighborhood high school, New Utrecht serves over 3,600 students. We have created a supportive environment for our parents and students that is conducive to learning. Students who attend our school feel respected, safe and supported. New Utrecht offers a challenging and rigorous Honors Program, an extensive Advanced Placement Program as well as an array of College Now classes that are affiliated with Kingsborough Community College. Our Career Technical Education program includes Medical Billing and Coding, Law, and Travel and Tourism. Students benefit from internships and job shadowing opportunities through the partnerships we have through our CTE programs such as the Justice Resource Center and Maimonides Hospital. Our focus is to provide as many “real life” experiences for our students so that they are better prepared for college and career. New Utrecht High School has strong family and community ties through our Leadership team and an active PTA who fully support the initiatives here at the school. Our parental support includes parent teacher conferences, parent workshops, Pupilpath. We partner with a number of community based organizations which include the Chinese Planning Council (CPC) and Brooklyn College. New Utrecht demonstrates its strengths through multiple academic programs, extracurricular activities and college readiness. Most classrooms employ rigorous instruction with a focus on literacy by increasing reading and writing in all subject areas. Professional development is teacher led and provides opportunities to best implement the Common Core as well as drilling down and looking deeply into the Framework of Effective Teaching. We are working hard as a school to achieve our goal to obtain academic rigor and college/career readiness for all of our students. We are also working to improve aligning assessments to the curricula, and the use of ongoing assessment practices ensuring that ongoing checks for understanding and actionable feedback result in effective instructional adjustments and students’ knowledge of their next learning steps. This has been an area where we have experienced some challenges but the administration has made professional development for the staff a priority so that we continue to grow in this area ensuring that teacher practice consistently reflects rigorous questioning and student to student engagement providing all learners with challenging tasks and opportunities for high levels of thinking. New Utrecht offers an array of extracurricular programs that provide opportunities for our students to remain in school beyond their school day. We offer more than 30 academic, art, social and cultural clubs and organizations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Each year New Utrecht puts on a talent and international show and a community performance that celebrates the Chinese New Year. Our National Honor Society participates in local community service and leadership events. We are proud of the consistent improvement in our latest student data. The School Quality Guide indicates that in the areas of student progress, student achievement and school environment, we are “meeting target.” The data for College Readiness and Closing the Achievement gap indicate we are “exceeding target.” We have seen an increase in our attendance rate but struggle to obtain the 90% full year percentage which includes our LTA’s. We continually work on meeting our goal of 89% attendance rate for the year with guidance interventions and parental outreach. We also identify struggling students and provide options for them to get back on track to graduate from high school. Our students have the same guidance counselor for the four years that they spend here at New Utrecht. Dedicated staff gets to know their students well and nobody slips “through the cracks.” Teachers meet in teams to discuss student work, data, teaching strategies and student outcomes. This allows the school to make informed decisions regarding curriculum, professional development and instructional practices. Teachers work together collaboratively to develop strategies, interventions and practices that meet the needs of their students. We pride ourselves on the communication that our students’ families receive on a regular basis. They can follow their child’s progress on Pupilpath tracking their academics as well as attendance. We use School Messenger providing our families with the most up-to-date information on what is happening at our school. We utililize our Webpage Newutrechthighschoolnyc.com to advertise all the past, present and future events and announcements. We have always maintained an open-door policy for parents and visitors providing opportunities for families to participate in their child’s high school experience. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special student populations are as follows:  Sixteen percent (16%) of our overall student body are designated as Students with Disabilities as per our registration data as of September 2017.  Twenty-two percent (22%) of our students are designated as English as a New Language (ENL) as per our  registration data as of September 2017. Seventy-six percent (76%) of our student body is economically disadvantaged. Out of that percentage, 22% are designated as English as a New Language (ENL) and 16% are designated as Student's with Disabilities as per our registration data as of September 2017. These special student populations need support in reading fluency and comprehension as well as developing good mathematical skills. Our special needs population include students who are economically disadvantaged, students with disabilities (SWD) and (ENL). We are a Title 1 school and we support our economically disadvantaged students by providing AIS interventions in order to address student's academic and social/emotional growth. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made progress over the past year in the following elements of the Framework for Great Schools:  Supportive Environment - our hiring practices reflect the demographics of the school. We have created a large student resource center where students are invited to receive tutoring in all major subject areas as well as access to computers to conduct research or work on projects. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12   Collaborative Teachers - consolidation of teacher centers to create interdisciplinary opportunities for teachers to collaborate.  Effective School Leadership - school leaders model and lead by example providing multiple opportunities for  the staff to engage in opportunities to improve student outcomes. Strong Family and Community Ties - we continue to maintain our relationship with Brooklyn College, Kingsborough Community College, St. Francis College, Maimonides Hospital and the Justice Resource Center. We offer opportunities for parents Involvement through our parent association as well as hosting various after school events inviting families to the school.  Trust - by working collaboratively our focus is to improve student outcomes. The administration works hard be transparent and fair so that across the entire school community there is mutual respect for all. The administration gives clear and transparent actionable feedback to the staff to ensure that we are here to provide a supportive environment for all. We continue to work hard toward meeting and surpassing the goals we set for our students, staff and the school. Improvement has been achieved over the years and we are enthusiastic about the continued success we expect to achieve in the years ahead. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K445 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 3563 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 333 300 37 82 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 114 48 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 74.2% % Reduced Lunch 21.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 29.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 25.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.83 1% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 82% 81% 77.2% 31.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH YSH NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES YES YES No N/A 457 394 26 86.2% 4.0% 16.6% 3.2% 40.2% 1.3% 20 14% 6.3 N/A N/A 86% 83% 81.6% 30% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A NO YSH YSH NO N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x N/A x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are committed to working on improving the performance of all students including students with disabilities and English Language Learners and we need to monitor student success overall. After reviewing our Math and ELA regents data for Cohort U and conducting a needs assessment based on the New York State Accountability data we determined the following: ALL STUDENTS/MATH  138 students who scored below a 65 (Level 1).  428 students who scored between 65 – 79 (Level 2).  178 students who scored between 80 – 84 (Level 3).  134 students who scored between 85 – 100 (Level 4). We broke down the data further and it showed the following subgroups:  377 Asian students of which 170 scored below 80%.  222 White students of which 153 scored below 80%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  244 Hispanic students of which 211 scored below 80%.  25 Black students of which 24 students scored below 80%.  139 students with disabilities of which 127 scored below 80%.  317 ELL students of which 197 scored below 80%. The following subgroups did not meet the 2018 New York State Target for Performance on any Math regents exams: Math Regents 2018 Performance 2018 School Target 125.06 94.23 84.69 116.04 145.26 104.25 100.48 139.78 All Students Black Hispanic White ALL STUDENTS/ELA  208 students who scored less than 65% (Level 1).  246 students who scored between 65 – 79 (Level 2)  181 students who scored between 80 – 84 (Level 3).  243 students who scored between 85 – 100 (Level 4). We broke down the data further and it showed the following:  377 Asian students of which 170 scored below 80%.  222 White students of which 153 scored below 80%.  244 Hispanic students of which 211 scored below 80%.  25 Black students of which 24 students scored below 80%.  139 students with disabilities of which 127 scored below 80%.  317 ELL students of which 197 scored below 80%. The following subgroups did not meet the 2018 New York State Target for Performance on the ELA exam: ELA Regents 2018 Performance 2018 School Target All Students Hispanic Asian White 159.8 146.8 164.8 166.7 159.6 130.8 167.6 170.5 So as a school we are approaching this data in two ways. First we have students who have not passed a regent exam in either ELA or Math and need at least a 65. The second and most challenging of issues is to retest those students who have already passed the exams with a high level 2 status and prepare them to get to a level 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  This data has provided us with the tools to approach the issue so that we can identify and counsel those students on the importance of retaking the exam(s). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will close the achievement gap on the school performance in ELA and Math in order to reach proficiency level set by the New York State Department of Education/ESSA by 2% providing equity and access to all students. Cohort U ELA: 150 students to move from Level 1 to Level 2 48 students to move from Level 2 to Level 3 Math: 107 students to move from Level 1 to Level 2 71 students to move from Level 2 to Level 3 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Focus on academic vocabulary, writing and mathematical skills for free response questions. Differentiate instruction to meet student's learning styles and levels to ensure that students can engage and achieve success with rigorous tasks. Create and analyze baseline assessments to monitor student progress. Breakdown performance tasks on previous regents exams to determine where students need to focus. Continued collaboration with Assistant Principals of English, Math and ESL along with their teachers to develop and modify curriculum as necessary. Develop additional strategies to support progress in literacy and math skills to help students achieve level 3 status on regents exams. Continue to offer intensive regents preparation in Math and English classes as well as after school academic intervention and encourage the use of our student resource center for peer to peer support. Strategically program students to prepare for the retake of these exams. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Administrators, September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Administrators September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher, Administrators September 20189 - June 2019 Teachers, Administors, Peer Tutors All students in Cohort U that did not achieve Level 3 status in either ELA or Math or who have not passed with a 65. All students in Cohort U that did not achieve Level 3 status in either ELA or Math or who have not passed with a 65. All students in Cohort U that did not achieve Level 3 status in either ELA or Math or who have not passed with a 65. All students in Cohort U that did not achieve Level 3 status in either ELA or 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Math or who have not passed with a 65. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have an open line of communication with families through Pupilpath as well as our guidance team regarding academic progress as well as the requirements for graduation. We provide multiple forms of communication in languages other than English (letters, mail phone blasts, teacher communication and advertising around the school building) to inform their families about tutoring and regents preparation offered during the school day, after school and on Saturdays through out the school year. We encourage parents to attend our SLT/PTA meetings throughout the year so that we can inform them of the importance of the need for their partnership in the success of their child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Base Option (SBO) for common planning time and for teacher teams. Our students are dismissed early on Wednesdays as a result of our SBO creating opportunities for teachers to meet. Per session for teachers to offer after school tutoring to prepare for the exams. Per session for Assistant Principals Supervision to supervise after school programs. Per session for Assistant Principal Guidance/Programming to analyze school data and make informed decisions based on findings. Allocating funds for teachers to attend professional development outside their work day. Allocating funds for data reflection on periodic assessments and regents results to implement appropriate instructional strategies in areas where students are in need of improvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will continue to evaluate and look at interim assessments offered to students during the course of the semester(s) in both Math and English baseline data will be used and compared to the mid year assessment administered in January 2019. Teacher teams will evaluate this data midyear and will adjust instruction accordingly for on/off track students. Teachers will collaborate on strategies to support students that are not making sufficient progress on skills need to achieve success on the regents. All students identified will take the ELA/Math exams beginning in January. By January 2019, we will increase school performance in ELA and Math in order to reach proficiency level by 1%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Datacation will be utilized to analyze student progress on specific skills aligned with both Math and English. The REDS report will be analyzed to assess student performance on Math and ELA regents administered in June 2018, August 2018 and January 2019. Teacher created assessments and mock regents will be used. January regents results will be analyzed to identify students who met the goal and those that did not will be targeted again for the June regents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X x x N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An essential component to student achievement is regular attendance in an environment where the staff knows the students well and provides levels of support for them to succeed in school. An analysis of the 2017-18, 2016-17 and 2015-16 ATS attendance reports indicate an average attendance rate of 87.6% (this is statistically noteworthy as our attendance rate has increased over the years) but we still have not achieved the Chancellor's 90% minimum attendance standard. A break down of the last three years we struggle to achieve 90% or above and the data is as follows: 2015/2016 - 87.2% 2016/2017 - 88.1% 2017/2018 - 87.5% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  According to the accountability data provided by the State for 2017 with regard to chronic absenteeism the subgroups show a higher percent than the intended targets. The data is as follows: Blacks - 38% Hispanic - 42% Asian - 18% White - 34% SWD - 41% ELL - 32% Economically Disadvantaged - 27% Essentially, 30% of all students are chronically absent where the schools target for school year 2018 was 28.8% for all students. With a large ELL population with a high mobility rate and an increasing population of students with disabilities, this presents many challenges of which we as a school deal with on a yearly basis. This situation results in a negative impact on graduation rates, credit accumulation and regents passing percentages. In the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, 80% of those students surveyed said they felt safe and indication that 20% who do not are likely to have attendance problems.  80% of students feel safe  59% felt they have gotten personal attention and support  66% received peer support for academic work Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the school will increase student attendance by 2.5%. To meet this goal we will increase the number and frequency of phone calls, letters, one on one meetings between the student and guidance counselor, parent meetings with counselors and teachers and home visits for students with poor attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will provide attendance policies for students and their families for excused and unexcused absences. Teachers will emphasize the importance of good attendance to their students in order to ensure their success. All students September 2018 – June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration Guidance Counselors Attendance Teacher Chronic absence will be monitored and the assistant principal guidance and the guidance team will attempt to identify barriers to good student attendance and address them accordingly. A system of rewarding good and improved attendance will be implemented by publicly posting monthly school attendance data. Assistant Principals will ensure that teachers are exercising appropriate attendance procedures and protocols for their classes to ensure that the attendance is accurate. Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration The family worker and attendance teacher will perform outreach and conduct home visits to families of students with chronic attendance issues. Teachers and guidance counselors will conduct outreach as well to any students in their caseload who are beginning to show any attendance issues. Students with 5 or more absences Parent coordinator will conduct workshop(s) on Pupil Path to show parents how they can monitor their child's daily attendance. Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Pupil Personnel Parent Coordinator September 2018 - June 2019 The parent coordinator will keep up to date phone numbers and addresses of all students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide personalized early outreach to families and foster positive relationships with students and families who have children with 5% or more absences via phone calls and letters from key staff members. Guidance counselors, the attendance teacher and family worker with the assistance of the parent coordinator will conduct outreach and conduct home visits. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Parents are provided daily correspondence from the school in regards to their child's attendance in the form of emails that generate when their child swipes into the building via the CAASS system. Parents are provided SKEDULA/Pupilpath access so that they can monitor daily attendance as well as monitor their child's academic performance in all classes and communicate with teachers and other key staff members. Chronic and problematic attendance issues are monitored via case conferencing and escalated to guidance conferences. Guidance conferences are conducted to support families and to provide counseling and community resources to assist in remedying both the presenting and underlying problem. These systems and structures are monitored by the Assistant Principal Pupil Personnel Services. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Providers of services collaborate with each other, as well as with community based organizations, ACS if necessary, to expand services that support parents and students in meeting the school's instructional and attendance expectations. New Utrecht High School will consistently enforce the need for accurate attendance taking procedures, identifying teachers as the first step in responding to problematic attendance issues. Specifically, teachers will make telephone calls, send letter and obtain email addresses when possible to establish contact with families via SKEDULA/Pupilpath. At risk students will be identified early and cutting and absenteeism will be addressed via home visits, case conferencing. Key personnel will conference with guidance personnel on an as-needed basis to schedule guidance meeting where chronic attendance issues can be addressed. Guidance personnel with meet with students and families to discuss alternative educational opportunities where and when appropriate for eligible students. When warranted, psycho-social support, counseling and outside mental health/family support services will be offered. Utilize per session hours for key staff to conduct outreach to students and their families with attendance issues. Responsible staff are the following: Family Workers  Assistant Principal Guidance  Assistant Principal Organization   Attendance Teacher  Case Conferencing Teams  Guidance Counselors  Principal  Parent Coordinator  Teachers Refer as needed, students to community based organizations, providing families with counseling services. They can be referred to the following agencies:  Administration of Children Services  Crisis Intervention Services  Coney Island Hospital  Maimondides Medical Center 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Academic Intervention Services (AIS) include tutoring, Saturday programs and a full PM school program is offered to students who have lost instructional time due who need to earn credits because of poor attendance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Taking attendance and monitoring daily/weekly attendance through ATS RSAL reports. Pupil accounting secretary will be providing on going attendance data that will be shared with key individuals who will address chronic absences. Guidance counselors and attendance personnel communicate attendance expectations to students and parents via guidance conferences, home visits, phone calls, letter, and SKEDULA/Pupilpath. By the end of January 2019 we will increase our student attendance rate by 1.25%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Weekly attendance data from the reports such as RISA and PADS on ATS and CAASS to identify students with patterns of absences.  Teacher's scholarship data used to correlate passing percentages with student attendance.  Each assistant principal will meet with the principal to ensure that teachers are accurately recording attendance and contacting the families of those students who exhibit attendance issues by reviewing teacher phone/mail/email logs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed x 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The results of our last Quality Review indicated that while there has been much movement toward structures of students working in groups, however the teachers need to focus on ensuring that the tasks students are engaged in are rigorous and thought provoking. All students would be arranged in purposeful groups where they are working together solving problems and asking each other questions. The teacher needs to provide the opportunities for students to own their work and when necessary offer temporary scaffolds and supports. In order to accomplish this teachers need to be engaged in professional development that provides them with the opportunity to engage in research based programs and sharing best practices with their colleagues on how to guide student's learning. Through multiple data sources that indicate areas of improvement for ELL's and SWD's among other subgroups we need to focus as a school on improving these areas in our teaching practices. New Utrecht High School has a fo SBO so that on Wednesdays we are able to plan for these professional learning opportunities taking advantage of other outside professional development that is relevant to our needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in a minimum of four professional learning opportunities developed by the assistant principals of supervision and key teachers who will work as a PD Committee to addresses rigorous instruction, student to student engagement and high order questioning of both students and teachers. Eighty (80%) percent of teachers will incorporate rigorous tasks, high order questioning and student to student interactions in their daily instructional routine. The goal is to obtain a 2% increase in overall scholarship in all subject areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Common planning time to allow content area teachers to perform inquiry work based on student outcomes as demonstrated by common assessments. This will also allow co-planning for ICT and Integrated ENL/ELA classes. Dedicated and structured Professional Learning time which was created via an SBO allowing time for teachers to meet and work collaboratively on curriculum design and adjustment- unit and lesson planning- inquiry teams- creation of common assessments. This should focus on all student subgroups with particular focus on ELL classes as well as curriculum revisions and teaching strategies for SWD. Provide professional learning opportunities for ISS , ENL and other teachers to develop inquiry protocols for analysis of results of common assessments, to allow teachers to unpack assessment results and determine best practices. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher, Administrators Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers of Content n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will have access to their child's teacher via Pupil Path and Google Classroom. Parents will be notified of opportunities to meet with their child's teachers at events such as open school night. Key members of the staff will inform parents of the work that teachers engage in via the school's website and other vehicles of communication that the school utilizes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO and the professional learning time scheduled. Teacher's common planning time 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Per session where applicable Professional Resources: Teach Like a Champion; Principles to Actions- Ensuring Mathematical Success for All, Scope and Sequence, The Big History Project Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Throughout the course of the fall semester data will be collected through classroom observations, lesson and unit plans, professional learning opportunity agendas and teacher team logs. By January 2019 we expect a 2% increase in overall scholarship in all subject areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by the presence of rigorous tasks, high order questioning and student to student interactions in 90% of lesson plans collected following observation or professional learning opportunities such as teacher teams. As 50% of the observations will be completed by January 2019 we will analyze the observation reports and lesson plans submitted. By January 2019, teachers will engage in a minimum of two professional learning opportunities. developed by the assistant principals of supervision and key teachers who will work as a PD Committee to addresses rigorous instruction, student to student engagement and high order questioning of both students and teachers. Eighty (80%) percent of teachers will incorporate rigorous tasks, high order questioning and student to student interactions in their daily instructional routine. The goal is to obtain a 2% increase in overall scholarship in all subject areas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The findings in the 2017-2018 Quality Review as well as the Principal's 2017-2018 PPOs indicated that , Pedagogy and Assessments were areas in need of improvement due to inconsistencies in planning for higher-order questions, assessing students for understanding to improve instruction and differentiating instruction to enable meeting the needs of all students to provide access to coursework. While movement toward more student centered instruction has been evident, we need to continue in this area, with the understanding of meeting the needs of the students in our classroom. This includes building the capacity of the pedagogical staff in designing formative assessments with the goal of understanding and using gathered data to drive instruction in real-time during class, as well as in designing future lesson and unit plans. This continues our focus on creating Professional Learning Communities, engaged in cycles of action research, monitoring and furthering initiatives to support student achievement across all subgroups. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the school leaders and key teachers will provide professional learning opportunities for colleagues to design assessments, review data and plan and implement differentiated instruction to support learners in their classrooms. These opportunities will increase student outcomes on formative and summative assessments throughout the school year by 2%. Mid year check points will be analyzed comparing scholarship data over the course of three (3) marking periods. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students Use of the SBO time in on Professional Development Wednesdays we will focus on creating formative assessments, analyzing data, and driving instruction. September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals/Supervision Schoolwide focus on norming expectations on Danielson 1e, 3c and 3d. Assistant principals coaching their teachers on differentiation and scaffolding and creating and modifying formative and summative assessments. All teachers September 2018– June 2019 Assistant Principals/Supervision Teachers Conduct joint observations with Principal/Supervising AP to continue norming and create next steps for the administration and teachers. Assistant Principals/Supervision Development of differentiation team within the Department of Instructional Support Services and other members of school community to continue to support colleagues; create model classrooms, and conducting intervisitations among colleagues. Teachers Teachers Instructional Coach Principal Assistant Principals/Supervision Assistant Principals/Supervision September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Sharing of information in the Parent Coordinator Newsletter, text alerts, emails, teachers reaching out to discuss individual student progress in terms of differentiated product, process, support an enrichment offered by staff. Principal will discuss at SLT meetings. Parent coordinator will be utilized for family outreach. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional cabinet meetings take place up to 3 times per month. SBO for planning and sharing of best practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholarship data following each marking period. Minutes from teacher team and instructional cabinet meetings. Classroom observations and data collected from Advance. Review of unit plans and revisions made to implement differentiation, scaffolds and assessments. These opportunities will increase student outcomes on formative and summative assessments throughout the school year by 1% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship data over the course of the term focusing on each marking period. Review of formative and summative assessment developed by teams of teachers. Analyze the results of the assessment and address the gaps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed x N/A N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At New Utrecht High School we are fortunate to have a small but active PA Executive Board. They have helped fund raise, organize events, and were a source of enormous support over the years. However, given that our school serves roughly 3,600 students and the average attendance at Parent Association Meetings includes less than 15 parents, we recognize this as an area of significant growth. It is our hope that in making several changes we will be able to significantly increase meaningful parent involvement in our school, communication between faculty members and parents and guardians, and increase our parents' perception of themselves as integral members of our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  By June of 2019, New Utrecht High School will have developed a more collaborative partnership with families and members of the surrounding community as evidenced by at least two school/PTA organized events having in attendance an excess of 50 families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Parent Coordinator will share monthly updates with the Administration on PTA meeting attendance and parental concerns raised. Schedule meetings and activities to match varying parent schedules. Provide incentives to encourage parents to attend school meetings and events. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents September 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator Offer relevant, engaging workshops and sessions for parents in conjunction with the parent coordinator Parents Reach out to all parents by developing themed PTA meetings every month. Effectively communicate with all parents through newsletters, phone calls, phone bank messages and Skedula, and our school based website. Parents September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Provide translation services for non-English speaking families reducing the barrier to understanding information. Parents and family members September 2018 – June 2019 PTA, Parent Coordinator Attendance office, Parent Coordinator, PTA members Select staff and students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Use Title 1 and Tax Levy funds to purchase the contracts for Skedula for contact via email and School Messenger to conduct robo calls to families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data will be collected at the end of January 2019 to identify the number of parents attending school events and conferences as well as parent outreach by teacher. The Parent Coordinator will monitor the number of participants who attend events for parents and families and monitor progress in achieving this goal. By January of 2019, New Utrecht High School will have developed a more collaborative partnership with families and members of the surrounding community as evidenced by at least one school/PTA organized event having in attendance an excess of 50 families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance at Parent meetings, financial aid and college nights Data collected from Skedula usage reports Parent/Teacher conference attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) School-wide Lowest Third, ENL’s, SWD’s , summative and formative assessments School-wide Lowest Third, ENL’s, SWD’s , summative and formative assessments School-wide Lowest Third, ENL’s, SWD’s , summative and formative assessments School-wide Lowest Third, ENL’s, SWD’s , summative and formative assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, tutoring Targeted Tutoring for Special Needs When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Both during the school day and after-school Students and ENLs, Regents Preparation, Brain Pop Tutoring, Small group instruction, tutoring Targeted Tutoring for Special Needs Students and ENLs, Regents Preparation, Brain Pop Tutoring, Small group instruction, tutoring Targeted Tutoring for Special Needs Students and ENLs, Regents Preparation, Brain Pop Tutoring, Small group instruction, tutoring Targeted Tutoring for Special Needs Students and ENLs, Regents Preparation, Brain Pop Both during the school day and after-school Both during the school day and after-school Both during the school day and after-school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referrals from Counselor/Teacher Workshops for students, CBO’s providing additional support to our at risk students. Social Worker support groups. Small group and one to one counseling sessions. Both during the school day and after-school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 260 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All STH will have the opportunity to meet with the school social worker so that they have at least one person in the building, besides their Guidance counselor, that they can rely on for support. STH will be provided with any educational materials needed to be successful throughout the school year. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. New Utrecht High School uses the online system, New Teacher Finder where we post our teacher vacancies. We also take advantage of the Open Market Transfer period which is generally from April through July. New teachers here at New Utrecht receive support from the administration by providing and encouraging them to attend Professional Development. Teacher mentoring and induction programs are important to retain teachers to give them the support they need. Instructional coaches model effective teaching strategies offering assistance with classroom management and coach in lesson design. A program is in place for intensive mentoring and training for new teachers to help them work with different types of students. In addition, ongoing content based professional development is continuously available for all teachers both inside and outside of the school for all teachers as well as outside. We strive to create and maintain a recruitment strategic planning team, form partnerships with traditional teacher education institutions, evaluate current hiring processes. We staff only licensed content specific teachers. There is very little teacher turnover due to the support from the Teacher lead school wide Professional Development team and the school’s administration. Highly skilled teachers are given assignments to support our lower performing students. Professional Development is planned for the year both school wide and individually by department to support teacher growth and to improve student outcomes. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). New Utrecht High School will continue to participate in professional development for all staff with an emphasis on low achieving areas. School staff will continue to attend academic and administrative Borough office meetings on a monthly basis. New Utrecht High School will continue to fund a School Wide Professional Development Team to address the CCLS, Framework for Great Schools initiative and the Danielson Framework for teaching Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Team consultations along with Town Hall Meetings with teachers will be used to actively discuss types of assessments that the school will use to measure achievement as well as to analyze the success of the assessments and how the data will be used moving forward. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 2,471,633 16,979 0 0 95,694 44,517 21,954,447 x X x x x x x 5 A, B, C, D, E 5 A N/A N/A 5 A,B,C 5B 5A,B, C, D, E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. New Utrecht High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. New Utrecht High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) New Utrecht High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: TITLE III After School Program SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITY #1: After School ESL Literacy with a reading and writing workshop: The After School instructional program is designed for ELL newcomers and students who have scored (EN) on the NYSESLAT for two or more years. This session will have 20 ELLs . The program will assess students’ abilities via NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data. This activity will help build literacy skills in all content areas. The program has a leveled library for teachers to utilize and to promote literacy where reading becomes a habit. This year we will add a Spanish Bilingual leveled library to supplement our TBE Spanish Bilingual program. The students are assessed four times a year for progress. All cohorts are involved since students are given an assessment when they start Title 3 program. The instructional focus is to raise literacy skills in all content classes and to increase the chance for students to begin attaining proficiency in English. ELLs will be provided with books to read that are aligned with their daily instruction. The projected start date is October 2018 and end in June 2019. The group will meet four times a week on M/T/TH/F from 3:15 -5:15 PM. It will be 8 hours a week. The service providers will be 1 certified ENL teachers with computer skills since the Milestones Literacy integrates technology. The language of instruction will be English and all students will access to bilingual dictionaries. The teachers will distribute and maintain workbooks, paper, markers, composition notebooks, and chart paper. The Bilingual Guidance counselors will provide outreach to students and parents. Also, they will monitor students who are not attending and at risk. The instructional materials are supplemental from those used in daily instruction. They are leveled reading books from Cengage National Geographic for students to read and improve their comprehension. The materials are leveled library books with high interest non-fiction books. The anticipated measurable outcomes are that ELLs should make progress in all content classes, and in addition, move up an ENL level and reading level. The success will be measured on a monthly basis by reading logs and the teachers' feedback. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITY #2: After School Math for Common Core Algebra & Geometry Regents Prep.- The instructional program will involve ELLs who will benefit with supplemental activities as they reach proficiency in English. It will serve 25 ELLs in the ENL/Bilingual Programs. The program will involve one certified Math teacher and an ENL Teacher who will teach collaboratively with the content area teachers. The ENL teacher will also plan collaboratively and infuse ENL strategies in the instruction in order to make content comprehensible for the ELL students in the classroom. Students will work in groups and work individually with the teachers. The cohort students or 2019 graduates will have priority, and then it will be open to the other cohorts. The instructional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information focus will be on Math literacy and building instructional strategies for the regents. This will allow ELLs to improve English and Math skills. The focus will always be to help ELLs reach English proficiency that will help and support students in all content areas. The instructional program will begin in October 2018 and end in June 2019. The group will meet four times a week for 8 hours on M/T/TH/F from 3:15 to 5:15 PM. The service providers will be 1 certified Math teacher and a floating ENL teacher. The ENL teacher collaborates with the Math teacher during the session. The ENL and Math teachers scaffold the instruction and implement comprehension strategies. The teachers discuss and practice the strategies during the Title 3 PD sessions. The language of instruction will be English and all students will have access to bilingual dictionaries. The students will receive a Regents books along with their CC Algebra and Geometry textbooks. Teachers will have paper, markers, composition notebooks, and chart paper. The Bilingual Guidance Counselors will provide outreach to students and parents for those students who are at risk and not attending. The anticipated measurable outcomes will be progress in English and passing the Math Regents. The expectation is to produce quality activities that allow students to perform and achieve at high levels. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITY #3: ENL Living Environment/Earth Science and Chemistry Regents Prep: The instructional program will involve ELLs in the graduating Cohort who have not passed or taken the regents. It will serve 30 students in the cohort. The instructional focus will be to build literacy skills and develop strategies to pass the regents. The group will meet four times a week for 8 hours on M/T/TH/F from 3:15 – 5:15 PM. The program will begin October 2018 and end June 2019. The service providers will be one (1) certified Science teacher, (1) certified Bilingual teacher, and an ENL teacher who will teach collaboratively with the content area teachers. The ENL teacher will also plan collaboratively and infuse ENL strategies in the instruction in order to make content comprehensible for the ELL students in the classroom. The language of instruction will be English and Chinese. The teachers collaborate during the sessions. The ENL and Science teachers scaffold the instruction and implement comprehension strategies. They discuss and practice the strategies during during the Title 3 PD sessions.The teachers will assess students and give differentiated instruction since students will be on different levels. The teachers will have paper, markers, composition notebooks, and chart paper. The Bilingual Guidance Counselor will recommend students who are struggling in science. They will also monitor attendance and have parental outreach. The anticipated measurable outcome should be progress in literacy skills and passing the science regents. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITY #4: CC ELA Regents Prep. After School: This program is designed for ELLs taking the CC ELA Regents in January/June. There will be 25 students who have failed the regents, repeating the class, and for students who need to graduate. This is for the graduating cohort , class of 2017, who have failed or not taken the ELA Regents. The students are 11th and 12th graders or repeaters. The instructional focus will be on the ELA Regents. Students will practice Part 1 (Reading Comprehension), Part 2 (Argumentative Writing), and Part 3 (Text-Base Response Writing). Teacher will integrate ENL and ELA standards that will support their daily ENL and ELA instruction. The instructional program will begin October 2018 and end in June 2019. The group will meet four times a week for 8 hours on M/T/TH/F from 3:15 -5:15 PM. The service providers will be 1 certified ENL teacher and 1 ELA teacher who teach Regents prep during the day. The language of instruction will be English and all students will have access to bilingual dictionaries. The Bilingual Guidance Counselor will provide parent and student outreach. They 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information will monitor students at risk since the students need the ELA Regents to graduate and to receive 75% or better for college readiness. The teachers will have paper, chart paper, and composition notebooks. The instructional materials will be past Regents exams. “The New Comprehensive English Examination.” In addition, books that student read during the year, “Outsiders”, “Tuesdays With Morrie ”, "The Alchemist", and “House on Mango Street.” The measurable outcomes are that students practice, apply and work in improving their chances of passing the ELA Regents. In addition the teacher will administer baseline and mock Regents assessments to students. Students will be responsible for supplemental assignments and class presentations. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITY #5: ENL Global and U.S. History Regents Prep.: This program is designed for ELLs taking the Regents in January/June. There will be 20 students who have failed the regents, repeating the class, and for students who need to graduate. This is for the graduating cohort , class of 2019, who have failed or not taken the any History Regents. The students are 11th and 12th graders or repeaters. Teacher will integrate ENL methodologies and strategies to support class work and regents preparation. The instructional program will begin October 2018 and end in June 2019. The group will meet four times a week for 8 hours on M/T/TH//F from 3:15 -5:15 PM. The service providers will be 1 certified History teacher or one certified bilingual history teacher with an ENL teacher who will teach collaboratively with the content area teachers. The ENL teacher will also plan collaboratively and infuse ENL strategies in the instruction in order to make content comprehensible for the ELL students in the classroom and to assist the content teachers. The language of instruction will be English and all students will have access to bilingual dictionaries. The Bilingual Guidance Counselors will provide student and parent outreach. They will also monitor their attendance. Students will practice with past regents exams. Teachers will have paper, chart paper, composition notebooks and markers for the class.The measurable outcomes are that students practice and work in improving their chances in passing the History Regents. Students will be responsible for supplemental assignments and class presentations. SUPERVISOR'S ROLE & RESPONSIBILITIES: The after school supervisor is responsible for the academic success, safety, and instruction of staff and students. The supervisor creates and structures a program based on ELL data, and then organizes the program by finding highly qualified teachers to offer supplemental activities. The supervisor has a meeting with teachers and guidance staff to organize classrooms, materials, and to translate Title 3 Parental Consent Form letters into Chinese, Spanish, and Arabic once the dates have been established. The whole school is made aware of the program. Then a snack program is secured for all ELL after school students from the Office of Food Services. Once the information is provided to parents and parental consent forms are collected, the supervisor begins the after school program. While the program is in session, the supervisor visits every class daily and makes sure every class has the necessary instructional materials. Students interested in joining the program is ongoing during school and after school. The supervisor also collects and monitors attendance and data (ATS,STARS, HSST, EDAT), and also meets with guidance to target students at risk. Books and supplies are also ordered for every activity. The supervisor develops a PD plan and delivers PD to Title 3 staff members. School security is in constant contact with the supervisor since it is a large program on the 5th floor. We serve more than 15% of our ELL population. We monitor students entering and exiting the program. This is where all the ELL resources can be found. There is no supervisor available to supervise with administrative and instructional leadership an ELL Title 3 program on a daily basis in the school. Currently, there is no other program running in the school that starts in September and ends in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information June. Therefore, an Assistant Principal with ENL experience is needed for the success of the program. . GUIDANCE ACADEMIC INTERVENTION & COLLEGE READINESS: Spanish and Chinese Bilingual Guidance Counselor will conference with students to inform them on career and college readiness. They will also play a role in informing parents in their native language about the importance of Title 3 programs and education. Furthermore, they will have conversations on credit accumulation, study habits, and student transcripts. Guidance will meet twice a week for two hours from October 2018 and end in June 2019. The service providers will be certified bilingual guidance counselors to focus on the Latino and Asian populations. The measurable outcome will be that more ELLs will take and pass NYS Regents exams and graduate. STUDENT ATTENDANCE All students will be on the snack roster. This will be the daily attendance for the after school and also that they received a snack. An assistant principal will be in charge of maintaining records of attendance and after school snacks. We currently have the parental consent forms in English, Arabic, Spanish, and Chinese. Teachers, Guidance Counselors, and the Foreign Language & ENL department will distribute the forms to students. Students submit forms to AP in charge before the students attend the program. All attendance is kept in one location in room 560. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Program INTRODUCTION OF PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT The Professional Development will be ongoing book studies by all Title III Teachers and Administrators. This will be a way to improve instruction and develop new strategies so that we can improve students’ outcomes. During PD teachers will model learning and instructional strategies from "Scaffolding Language and Learning", "Mosaic of Thought", and "Teaching Vocabulary to ELLs". Then the teachers will discuss and make adjustments before utilizing the PD experience in the classrooms and after school. The PD sessions will impact their planning and preparation for their day classes. Our 2018-2019 PD will have a focus on literacy with elements of comprehension strategies, academic vocabulary, text complexity, and differentiation. Also, the PD will involve the school's focus on questioning, discussion techniques, and student engagement. The school supervisors will oversee and monitor the PD on all levels. SUPPLEMENTAL PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES #1-5 All teachers will work as a group in book studies where there will be time to discuss and present. The facilitator is the AP of Foreign Language and ENL. The facilitator will attend district PDs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part C: Professional Development on compliance and instruction to support the after school instructional activities. The PD will be once a month for an hour after school on the third Friday of the month. The total PD sessions will be 9. The monthly agendas and attendance of PD will be kept on file in the office of the AP in charge.The instructional activities will support teachers so that teachers can utilize their PD activities in class. This will be a process where we will see better student outcomes and progress for our ELL population. All Title 3 teachers of ENL, Math, Science, and History. The ENL Assistant Principal will provide the PD. The book study will involve teachers presenting, modeling, writing, planning lesson plans and units, and summarizing what was read and then have an open discussion to develop ideas. Teachers will be monitored by the ENL Assistant Principal. It will be per session for 1 hour a month during the week or after school. The professional materials will be books that practice instructional strategies for ELLs. They are: “Mosaic of Thought”, "Teaching Vocabulary to ELLs", and “Scaffolding Language Scaffolding Learning.” The Title 3 teachers will utilize ELL strategies that they learned and practiced during the Pd sessions to their classes and enhance their teaching approach for all learners. Teachers will be familiar with ELL students by developing more of an awareness. The teaching approach of reading and comprehension strategies will allow learning to take place where all learners understand the content. The research based strategies improve student learning and comprehension. All these books will be purchased with our Title III funds. Extra materials to purchase will be loose-leaf and chart paper. The measurable outcome will be: Improving instruction that is meaningful to all students and improve Regent scores by 5%. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL and Computer Technology for ELLs and their parents. Parents will be invited to come once a month and spend time with the Bilingual Guidance Counselors and teachers. This is a two hour instructional program during after school for parents and students. Parents and students need to work as partners in attaining proficiency in English. They will be involved with (1) hour of ENL Instruction, and (1) hour of computer technology. The common goal will be for all to achieve English proficiency. The providers will be 2 teachers; 2 certified ENL teachers, 1 certified bilingual guidance counselor. This process should continue in the home where NLA is transitioning into English. Materials will be ENL Books, computers, English and NLA materials for parents. The measurable outcome is to increase English language skills at home and school, and also to make parents aware of ENL methodologies. Our NLA teachers are involved in translating information for our ELL parents whenever necessary. Passing rate should increase by 5% for ELLs that do attend with parents. Quarterly presentations and festivities will also be included in the program during after school. All records of agendas, attendance, and invitations in English, Chinese, Arabic,and Spanish will be kept on file in the office of the AP in charge. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name New Utrecht High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 445 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Maureen A. Goldfarb Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher John Pearson Teacher/Subject Area Dr. Chie Soong/Science Teacher/Subject Area Clement Tian/HLA Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Giacomo Rutigliano Coach type here School Counselor Yan Yu Lin Parent type here Parent Coordinator Myra Mora Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Lisa Gretano, AP-Data C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 5 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 14 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 3713 Total number of ELLs 728 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.61% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2004-5 K 1 4 3 2 Lang. Chinese Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 14 10 11 12 9 8 3 0 0 0 0 14 9 8 3 Tot # 34 0 0 0 0 0 34 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The early literacy assessment tools available are the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL/Spanish LAB and the Gates-Macginietic for vocabulary and comprehension. When the student is admitted, the student is interviewed by the A.P. ENL. This is where initial placement happens. The AP interviews and receives a writing sample. Then the student is tested within 2-5 school days. The ENL teachers monitor every student in class and examine if the student needs literacy intervention. In addition, we utilize our Title 3 and 1 funds for literacy intervention during after school. Currently our ELL population according to the NYSESLAT is broken up into four categories. We have 15% Entering, 16% Emerging, 18%Transitioning, and 51% Expanding.This tells us that about 66% is close to obtaining English Proficiency, and about 34% will need two or more years in an ENL setting. With our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  focused PD we will more have more ELLs testing out and being served for up to two years, and also more ELLs moving up or within the levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL and ELA teachers collaborate to develop a curriculum with ELL scaffolds. Teachers meet and plan during teacher team meeting and common planning time. The 2017-18 school year, the school ordered for teachers online curriculum mapping tool by Rubicon Atlas. This will ensure that teachers are updating their instructional strategies for all ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate success through the NYSESLAT. We monitor their 3 year progress. Furthermore, we monitor ELA Regents exam and yearly graduation rate. In addition to instructional changes, we recommend students to attend after school regents tutorials. The HLA Assessment in Chinese determines if students have literacy deficiencies in thier native language. The ELL staff interview students during the in-take process to check for comprehension as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have a Title 3 after school program with Chinese language intervention. The program also offers help in all the content areas. Students and staff have built a strong cultural learning relationship in the school. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We have literacy levels for ELLs. The students who score very low (EN) on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are placed here. The teachers use the literacy textbook Milestones and curriculum with Title 3 support in the after school program. This year we are piloting and planning to integrate System 44 Next Generation into classroom instruction to build reading skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After receiving the proficiency levels and grades, we see that our ELLs are performing at an Transitioning/Expanding levels(68%) and Entering/Emerging (15%) on the NYSESLAT. Our newcomers on the NYSITELL are performing on a (En/Em) levels. Many students in the (EN) level (15%)are newcomers and SIFE ELLs. These students may need two years of intensive English instruction before they advance. ELLs on the (Tr) level to (Ex) levels have the abilities to test out within two years. The (Ex) level for 11th and 12th grades are low since students have difficulty attaining English proficiency. By the 12 grade, we only have 10% who have not attained English Proficiency. This school year 125 ELLs attained English proficiency according to the 2017 NYSESLAT. Our 9th and 10th grades currently have the most Trasitioning and Expanding ELL students. Many newcomers are scoring En/Em on the NYSITELL. Those who score Entering level show low skills in reading writing, listening, and speaking. Last year we tested 168 newcomers: 9 tested out and 159 became ELL entitled. All entitled ELLs need academic intervention in reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The AP of ENL and AP of ELA work together with the AP of Guidance and Programming to make adjustments to programs. In August, we look at the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents data to determine the proper ENL/ELA minutes for ELLs and tested out ELLs. We pair-up the co-teachers for the integrated ELA classes. The ELL guidance staff does updates as well and they receive PD on programming. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The model is self-contained. ELLs are placed according to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. The Entering Level will receive 2 blocked periods of Standalone ENL. The Emerging level will receive one period of Standalone ENL. All Entering and Emerging students will have one integrated ELA class with ENL teachers. The transitioning and expanding ELLs will receive an integrated ELA class. The group is ungraded and are grouped by proficiency level. All students will receive an ELA class with content and ENL certified teachers. Students will also receive a foreign language, ESL Math and Science classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. The TBE model is self-contained. ELLs are placed according to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. The Entering Level will receive 2 blocked periods of Standalone ENL. The Emerging level will receive one period of Standalone ENL. All Entering and Emerging students will have one integrated ELA class with content and ENL teachers. The group is ungraded and homogeneous with the same proficiency level. All students that are Tr, Ex and Cm will receive an ELA class with dual certified teacher or co-teaching integrated class with ENL certified teachers. Plus students will receive an HLA classes and TBE Math, History and Science classes. Students will be exposed to more English as the students move up levels or test out. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Assistant Principal with the guidance staff carefully evaluate NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores to determine the instructional minutes. Our instructional time per week for ELLs go beyond the required time under CR Part 154. This includes ENL, ELA, and HLA instruction. A. Each class period is 48 minutes. The Entering level receives 645 minutes of services per week; the Emerging level receives 435 minutes of services per week, and the Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding levels receive 225 minutes of ESL services per week. Instructional time is calculated per amount of period per day times 5 days. In addition, bilingual students receive 225 minutes of HLA instruction per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area classes are transitional bilingual and ENL freestanding using ESL methodology (mainly through scaffolding). The instruction has to be planned, and also how to deliver instruction for every ELL must also be planned and practiced. This happens during our department PD sessions, teacher teams, and common planning time. The instruction has to be rich in literacy and content. The language development must be scaffold; therefore, tapping into their prior knowledge and making connections to their daily lives with meaningful activities that they can utilize in the outside world. The materials used are texts that they can read and connect with, bilingual dictionaries, plenty of visuals, leveled readers for students to explore, charts, graphic organizers, and posters. Teachers are using informational and complex text to their daily planning (CCLS R 1-4). Also teachers are infusing persuasive and argumentative writing (CCLS W 7-9). In many bilingual content classes, teachers are using academic vocabulary and infusing English which is align with the LAP (CCLS L 5-6). The HLA teachers in class are beginning 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  to incorporate literary elements and history content which are aligned with their ELA classes history. The teachers enrich and reinforce academic vocabulary that is essential in comprehending content knowledge. All ESL teachers will integrate reading comprehension, writing and vocabulary strategies in their daily planning with the history and ELA teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The HLA classes are by grade level. The HLA teachers evaluate the students with an entrance exam to see their literacy level in their first language. The teachers will use this to differentiate their instruction. At the end of the year, the Chinese Bilingual students are given the CRT and a Chinese Regents. The other languages in the ESL Freestanding program take the language regents as well. ESL and HLA teachers meet to discuss student performance and ways to introduce content knowledge in their daily instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. We have SIFE in our after school program. We identify ELLs that have had an interrupted formal education. They are placed in a self-contained/blocked program, 5 times-per-week for 96 minutes. This class is an ENL Literacy class which focuses on phonemic awareness, academic vocabulary and comprehension strategies. All ENL levels 1-2 will have a double period block in which teachers will be able to implement the readers and writer’s workshop and some components of the RU Models. Students will explore and develop literacy skills. The students also have one ELA class with ELA/ENL teachers where they are exposed to literature and literary elements in anticipation of the ELA Regents. Classes are equipped with leveled libraries. There is also an after school program for daily academic work. The grant will involve a CBO who will help us with career and college readiness. Also they will be involved with community organizations and parental outreach. B. All newcomers and/or those who score (Emerging) on the NYSESLAT are placed in a double period language development class and a daily ELA class with an ESL/ELA teachers. Students in every ENL class will have a leveled library with high interest fiction and non-fiction books for independent reading. Furthermore, classes will have class sets of novels for guided reading and read alouds. ELLs will have exposure to text and ELA. The annual NYSESLAT will determine if the ELLs are progressing. Moreover, we have an on-going after-school program funded by Title III. All ENL teachers will have training on comprehension strategies with a focus on academic vocabulary, the use of leveled classroom books, and literary elements. This is also aligned and reinforced in HLA and ELA classes. Instruction is differentiated by using leveled text and Dept of Knowledge Levels. DOK has four levels which range from recall to extended thinking. Some activities may be: describe the features of a place or people, describe cause/effect of a particular event, support ideas with details examples, and describe how common themes are found across texts from different cultures. C. Developing students have difficulty in reading and writing skills. Therefore, our efforts have been to strengthen their comprehension and to expose them to texts. Students have daily reading with a guided activity that the teacher models. Usually, the activities reflex activating prior knowledge and making connections to their daily lives. All ENL teachers will have training on comprehension strategies with a focus on vocabulary, leveled classroom books, and literary elements. This is also aligned and reinforced in HLA and ELA classes. D. Long-Term ELLs who are six years or more in an ESL /Bilingual program demonstrate that they are taking more than the prescribed amount of time to gain proficiency in English. These students continue with services until they test out with the NYSESLAT. These ELLs are also recommended to attend the after-school instructional program and the Saturday program. This year, we are tracking students by using available data to see if they are passing classes and making progress by using NYSESLAT scores. These students receive Academic Intervention Services from Title III Instructional programs that range from ENL Literacy to Regents Prep. All ENL teachers will have training on comprehension strategies with a focus on vocabulary, leveled classroom books and literary elements. Along with texts we have integrated ELL instructional strategies that will strengthen their knowledge of English. Some strategies are: vocabulary and language development, guided interaction, universal themes, modeling, graphic organizers and visuals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  E. The English Proficent students still receive support in their ELA classes with an ENL or Dual Certified teacher for two years after exiting ELL status.. Their testing accommodations still remain intact. The guidance counselor monitors their progress. These students usually graduate with their cohort. Many EPs still continue with a foreign or native language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL teachers are using comprehension strategies from their PD book "Mosaic of Thought". The strategies incorporated are: visualizing, inferring, making connections to texts, and determining importance. We are strengthening reading strategies for classroom instruction which are predicting, sequencing, modeling, summarizing and questioning. Moreover, we have included also writing strategies which are: semantic webs, information grid, modeling the text, dialogue journals, double entry journal, novel ideas, and reading with a focus. We are integrating independent and shared reading time into the classrooms. Plus, we have leveled classroom libraries with multilingual dictionaries in every ELL classroom. All of these provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. We have ungraded classes since students are placed according to level and not grade level. The strategies incorporated in the content areas were already mentioned. They are: vocabulary and language development, guided interaction, explicit instruction, universal themes, modeling, graphic organizers and visuals. Students use native language texts that are rich in literature and information. This information will transfer into their ELA classes and prepare them for the ELA CC Regents. The materials may be the following: semantic webs, information grid, print rich text, dialogue journals, double entry journals, novel ideas, leveled readers, and English and Bilingual dictionaries. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have developed curriculum maps for all ELL classes with texts, standards, and strategies that reach out to all learners. Our ELL teacher teams focus on ELLs who are not performing well in class and are at risk for graduation. The diverse strategies mentioned in #8 are effective in all content classes. The strategies that are taught and used in ELL classes should follow the students to their content classes. ELL-SWD will have an ENL teacher in their history content classes. This will reinforce and support all students in comprehension and academic vocabulary. Students placed in an ICT class are placed according to their IEP. The ISS AP collaborates with ENL AP to place a student in an ICT with exam data and grades in classes. (NYSESLAT, NYSTIELL, report cards, and any tests taken that is in the IEP) ENL and IIS teachers use common planning time to establish strategies and new learning strategies. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ESL Freestanding and Chinese Bilingual students are: Regent Prep. during and after school for all content classes, credit recovery for credit accumulation and Regents Prep. Title 3 and 1 funds are utilized for after school instructional activities and support. The instruction is offered in English and Chinese. We first target cohort ELLs who need to pass regent(s) in order to graduate in June. Our Regents Prep. include: ELA, Living Environment/Biology, Integrated Math, Global History and U.S. History. Literacy is also included in the after school for newcomers and SIFE. This is an extra support to get the students up to speed in English acquisition. Our guidance staff is involved as well to have students participate in the after school program. On staff we have Chinese and Spanish speaking teachers to assist other teachers and students. 60% are Chinese speakers, 30% are Spanish speakers, and 10% are mixed LOTE. All rooms have bilingual dictionaries. Students use their native language if content is unclear; therefore, our after school staff is equipped with teachers that speak LOTE. (Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Russian, Italian) 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are expanding our Chinese TBE program since all parents of incoming students are selecting TBE. We have had a 10% increase for bilingual. We added one more AP Chinese class. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are included in after school and supplemental services. We have credit recovery after school programs for which they participate in. Our year round Title 3/1 instructional programs are structured for ELLs so that they make gains in attaining proficiency in English. The program gives ELLs access to Regents prep. with literacy support. HLA support is in Regents prep for those who are taking the regents in their native language. Students must fill out a parental consent form. They are invited by teachers and guidance counselors. Announcements are made during the day to inform them, and information is posted in school. During Parent-Teacher conferences we advertise the programs for them to see. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support the learning of ELLs in content areas and language development are with: meaningful and real world literary and academic texts, technology used for gathering research information and to develop writing skills, print-rich and visual aides with overheads and charts (T-charts, diagrams, graphic organizers, collaborative activities that involve group projects). Thematic approach is used for the whole class with magazines, newspapers to create stories, cooperative learning/social interaction. The instruction must be modeled with real world materials. There should be read alouds and silent reading involved in the lesson development. Teachers focus on building reading comprehension skills by having a readers and writers workshop with academic vocabulary and complex text in all ESL classes. ELL teachers utilize leveled libraries for reading and writing in the classroom and after school. In addition, some ELL teachers are beginning to utilize SmartBoards in their instruction. All ELL classrooms have Promethium Boards for teachers to utilize in their daily instruction. The Native language materials are texts that are aligned with the ELA (literature, biographies, informational and complex texts), graphic organizers to help them organize content, visuals, and bilingual dictionaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? HLA support is delivered through literature in their native language which is aligned with the common core learning standards in the TBE program. Teachers focus on modeling literacy skills in students’ native language with thematic readings in an academic context. Teachers use visual and print rich materials to help support learning in their native language. Students are involved an accountable talk and lively discussions in their native language. Once the HLA level goes beyond level 3, there is more of a focus on literary elements,tasks 1-4 which support the ELA Regents and history content. In the ENL program we have language classes to support Chinese, Italian, and Spanish. Many of our teachers offer support outside of the classroom in Russian and Arabic in the tutoring center and in the after school Title 3 program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL classes have mixed grades with mixed ages. Our ELLs are all leveled according to their reading and writing scores on the NYSESLAT and NTSITELL. The integrated content classes only have students with two grade levels. Moreover, teachers differentiate by examining data and informing instruction to their needs. The teacher can group students according to weaknesses and strengths and form work stations where parts of the lesson can focus on their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. It's one school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Students are encouraged to visit the school during the open house. We have freshman orientation in June for ELLs to come and also late August for ID and programs. School guidance counselors and all APs are present for orientation days. During the summer there is Title 3 programs that help students transition to high school life. The newly enrolled and /or Over The Counter students, we meet them once they arrive from the enrollment center. The Parent Coordinator intervenes to help families see the school and staff. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer 14 Advanced Placement Courses. The language electives are Chinese, Spanish, and AP Chinese and Spanish.. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? This PD plan will also include Subject area teachers, Paraprofessionals, Secretary, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors and the Parent coordinator since they are involved and/or participate in delivering instruction to ELLs. The days for PD this year are: 9/30, 11/3, 12/16, 2/1, 2/24, 3/23, 4/20, 5/18. The workshops are given for the Title 3/1 teachers during after school by the AP of ENL. This allows content are teachers with extra support in comprehension strategies, academic vocabulary, and assessment/data. 1. PD Plan Literacy Learning and Language Development • How much reading is enough? (read aloud, silent reading) • Leveled Readers in class • Cooperative Learning Activity: Reading, Think-Pair-Share, Sequencing Reading and writing content towards ELA Regents • Infusing CCLS in lesson planning with comprehension standards • Literary Elements in all ENL levels • Integrating word finds and visuals in daily lessons Teaching Language through Content • Why teach language through content? • New ENL Approaches-English language Development (thematic units) • Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (focus is on academic Content) • Content based Instruction – teaching both language and content with Thematic inquiry (making content meaningful and functional) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Scaffolding Language • Making meaning Explicit with academic vocabulary • Learning in group settings • Engaging students in authentic work • Leveled libraries with literacy support Reading and writing in a second language • Planning for Reading – Developing activities for before, during, and after reading that are meaningful • Selecting books with universal themes • Familiarity with genres and complex text writing for a purpose and to have a particular organizational structure • How to build knowledge of a topic (scaffolding) • How to model texts (for group work and independent writing and reading) Integrating Language and subject learning • Planning curriculum mapping with thematic units • Developing essential questions • UBD – Understanding By Design (backward planning) The teaching staff has ongoing PD. The school-wide PD will focus on teacher collaboration and student engagement. Teachers in their Common Planning Time will meet once a day. PD Materials will be developed around the following 2 texts: 1. Scaffolding Language, Scaffolding Learning by Pauline Gibbons 2. Mosaic of Thought by Zimmermen 3. Teach Like a Champion 2.0 by Doug Lemov During PD teachers practice: comprehension strategies, academic vocabulary strategies, graphic organizers with complex text, how to scaffold instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support the staff has is informative and instructional. All teachers receive the latest scores on ATS for students that were in middle school and newcomers. The staff has all the latest texts on ELL strategies. This year we are expanding more into vocabulary, complex text, and argumentative writing. The staff has Common Planning Time and teacher Teams where teachers are informed and have discussions on ELLs. We have assemblies with teachers and students. Title 3 programs involve9th graders to get involved in social and academic activities. We have freshman orientation where students come in early and get familiar with the new school building, and grade level meeting to introduce staff and interventions. Our CBO the Chinese Planning Counsel has yearly activities for 9 th graders. All staff during their monthly department PD sessions include some ELL training. On school-wide PD days the school does focus part of the day on ELL training. Staff is also encouraged to attend outside PD sessions for ELLs. All ESL and Title 3 which includes bilingual teachers have PD 1-2 month on language acquisition with content area instruction. The training includes instructional strategies and materials to assist former ELLs and ELLs in class. This is also part of their CPT where teachers plan lessons together and create curriculum for all students. The schools PD team maintains record of meetings. Records will be kept with time and an agenda for which teachers sign in and participate in the training. Special Education teachers participate in the ELL Pd sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL Administrator and ENL teachers will meet to organize a plan for the meetings. We will use our monthly flex day for parents to come, and also one period during the week. Most of our teachers speak a second language. If we need to, we will notify the Interpretation and Translation Unit for assistance. Teachers will discuss progress, areas of needs improvement, and how to receive academic intervention services. All teachers will have a phone log and keep letters in a folder for each students. For the annual meetings, teachers will have a form to fill out with signatures, and a copy of the form will be placed in student's file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All teachers have phone logs for parental outreach which specifies the need and solution. The phone can be found in the AP's office Rm 560. The annual meetings are done twice a year where teacher has a sign -in sheet. This sheet is kept in the AP's office. Parents are invited to come once the teacher requests them to come. All copies of sent letters are kept with the teacher in a folder for parents to view the outreach they attempted. In addition, our Parent Coordinator informs and invites parents to school activities and functions. She is the first person they meet when parents enter the school. PC informs parents on District-wide events. Parents do get involved if called to come and discuss about their child's progress in school. The school is equipped with staff that can assist in translating for parents in any language. When parents admit their child to school, the school staff meets them and offers the support available at our school. Parents come for freshman orientation with their child, and also for the open house. Some parents are in involved in the PTA, College Night, and School Shows. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maureen Goldfarb, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: New Utrecht High School School DBN: 20K445 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maureen A. Goldfarb Title Principal Giacomo Rutigliano Assistant Principal Myra Mora Parent Coordinator John Pearson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Dr.Chie Soong/Science Teacher/Subject Area Clement Tian/HLA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Yan Yu Yan School Counselor Michael Prayor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lisa Gretano Other Data Specialist Yelena Gulyayeva Other ENL/ISS Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/18/17 09/18/17 09/18/17 09/18/17 09/18/07 09/18/17 09/18/17 09/18/17 09/18/17 09/18/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K445 School Name: New Utrecht High School Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Giacomo Rutigliano Assistant Principal yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents that need documents translated and oral interpretation are referred to school staff. We have our guidance counselors and NLA teachers available for written translations and oral interpretation for all parents. The languages are : Chinese, Spanish, Russian, Polish, and Arabic. Many oral interpretations are done on site when parents admit their children to our school, and occasionally written translations are done with Foreign Transcripts and Documents on site. Parental Notification for school activities and events are done in three languages. ELL eligibility forms and information for the 13 languages are on the DOE website for the AP of ENL to utilize and inform parents. The ATS reports RHLA, RPOB give home language information and guide us to see our language needs. Chinese, Spanish, and Arabic languages increase every year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese/Mandarin Spanish ARAUCANIAN ALBANIAN AMOY (A.K.A.FUKIENESE) ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) BURMESE CHAM CHINESE ANY CHECHEN CANTONESE DUTCH FRENCH GEORGIAN GERMAN HAITIAN CREOLE HEBREW HUNGARIAN HAUSA INDONESIAN (AKA BAHASA) 2251 1878 1176 1 52 0 190 18 6 5 1878 0 0 1 3 10 2 6 1 2 37.16 31.01 19.42 0.02 0.86 0 3.14 0.3 0.1 0.08 31.01 0 0 0.02 0.05 0.17 0.03 0.1 0.02 0.03 2229 1873 1177 0 52 7 195 18 6 5 1207 1 373 0 2 12 2 7 1 2 36.08 31 19.43 0 0.86 0.12 3.22 0.3 0.1 0.08 19.93 0.02 6.16 0 0.03 0.2 0.03 0.12 0.02 0.03 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  ITALIAN KACHI KOREAN KOREAN MOSSI (AKA MORE) ENGLISH POLISH PORTUGUESE RUSSIAN SINDHI SLOVAK SPANISH (AMERICAN) SIGN LANGUAGE TIBETAN TURKISH TADZHIK (AKA TAJIK) URDU UKRAINIAN UZBEK VIETNAMESE 4 2 21 2 4 0 1 2251 45 2 204 2 1 1176 1 3 7 1 107 17 23 8 0.07 0.03 0.35 0.03 0.07 0 0.02 37.16 0.74 0.03 3.37 0.03 0.02 19.42 0.02 0.05 0.12 0.02 1.77 0.28 0.38 0.13 4 2 22 2 4 293 0 2229 45 2 205 2 2 1177 1 3 7 1 116 18 24 8 0.07 0.03 0.36 0.03 0.07 4.84 0 36.8 0.74 0.03 3.38 0.03 0.03 19.43 0.02 0.05 0.12 0.02 1.92 0.3 0.4 0.13 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent teacher conferences letters and phone announcements November and March Letters on Student Progress/ Report Cards All Year After-School Title 3/1 Letters/Consent Forms September 12-21, 2018. NYSESLAT Testing Dates Memo March/April 2019 Skedula All Year Every department has letters in multiple languages. School has a phone system that sends messages in parents preferred language. Foreign Language teachers translate the consent form every year. Foreign Language teachers translate and the information is distributed in ENL classes. For languages that we can't find in-house translators, we will then utilized the Translation and Interpretation Unit's services. Skedula sends out messages to parents via email in their preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-teacher conferences : November and March PTA/SLT Meetings Second Tuesday of every month Open House October 2018 Freshman Orientation June 2019 School Aides, paras and teachers are invited to help provide interpretation for the evening and afternoon sessions. For the meeting we have Chinese and Spanish teachers who are part of the team. They translate for parents of Chinese and Spanish native students. We have students ( ages 18 or older) and staff that provide interpretations for Spanish and Chinese. We also have paras, teachers and school aides who assist for other languages. We have students (ages 18 or older) and staff that provide interpretations for Spanish and Chinese. We also have paras, teachers and school aides who assist for other languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school uses pupilpath/Skedula to communicate with parents. It automatically translates the message into the parents preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All school administrators are aware of the resources available. The Guidance, ENL and Foreign Language Departments have teachers and counselors available. They speak multiple languages to help the families in the building during school hours. The school building has signage in the main entrance regarding where to receive language services either by school staff or the language DOE hot line number. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All LEP students and parents will be notified by mail regarding the Translation Services available in our building with a location. All information regarding the services will be posted in the school building. Staff is aware of the services available to assist students and parents during the school day. In addition, we have pupilpath/Skedule that translates events via email to all parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will monitor quality and availability of services with parent surveys during parent-teacher conferences, open house, freshman orientation, and the HLIS for new admits to NYC. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
