2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K474 School Name: PROGRESS HIGH SCHOOL FOR PROFESSIONAL CAREERS Principal: JASMINE PENA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PROGRESS HIGH SCHOOL 14K474 School Number (DBN): 331400011474 9-12 850 Grand Street, Brooklyn, NY 11211 718-782-0911 Fax: wjusino@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: 718-387-0228 Phone Number: W. Jusino School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: William C. Jusino Carlos Medina Christina Rivera Alberto Garcia EldaMonterosso Jose Del Rosario Matthew Vega N/A Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110, Brooklyn, NY 11211 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-455-4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Bfitzg2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: ( 718) 935-3954 Phone Number: 718 935-2382 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. William C. Jusino Carlos Medina Christina Rivera Christina Rivera Jose Del Rosario Matthew Vega NA FranciscaFeliciano PatricioCruz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Shirley Vega Brenda Jusino Alberto Garcia Diana Rendon Kendra Smith Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal/Staff Member/ Assistant Principal/Staff Member/ Teacher Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission/Community Section 4: SCEP Overview PROGRESS High School for Professional Careers (PHS) is focused on raising the relevance and rigor of education. Ensuring students are equipped with the skills necessary to meet the challenges and opportunities in a 21st century global society are at the heart of the mission and vision. The goal is to graduate all students ready for college, career and a productive life in this new century. PROGRESS is dedicated to going beyond providing our students with just the educational basics. To accomplish this, the school will work collaboratively with all stakeholders and actively involve students, parents and community members as partners. The PROGRESS High School for Professional Careers “community school” model is deeply rooted in the mission, principles and integrated practices of our dedicated faculty and staff. In this spirit, our school challenges all its members, (staff, students and parents) to expand their vision, explore their potential and invest the resources of body, mind, spirit and community in a lifelong dedication to respect, mastery and educational excellence. It is out intent to achieve our vision. We will continue to hold the highest expectations of students and staff. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Guidance Department is comprised of three counselors, five grade advisors and an Assistant Principal who works with faculty, staff and parents to facilitate academic, career, personal, and social development for all students. Counselors and advisors are focused on the communication of information and prevention, as well as crisis intervention and remediation. Counselors meet with each student to assess their needs and to design and implement an individualized service plan, which may include tutoring, counseling, or outside referrals. Career and college activities are also implemented in order to develop long-term goals and personal growth. The Guidance Counselors, Attendance Staff, Family Paraprofessionals, and Community Based Organizations have effectively collaborated on attendance-related issues and have made a concerted effort to increase attendance rates through telephone outreach, home visits, and individual meetings with parents and students. Within individual and group work the need may arise for additional services. The Grand Street Campus houses a LYFE Center and the School Based Support Team. In addition, the school currently collaborates with various organizations that assist with individual and group counseling, outreach to parents, academic incentives, extracurricular activities, job readiness preparation, internships, and job placement. Strategic Collaborations The Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center School Based Health Clinic (SBHC) Our SBHC provides comprehensive health care services to our students. We look forward to the SBHC to continue to provide much needed medical and dental services, reproductive health care, mental health and crisis intervention, and social services. Although we will continue to disseminate information on free student medical insurance, the SBHC does not charge a fee for services. Many students are plagued by health, social and mental health issues and is, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  oftentimes, unwilling or unable to obtain needed services. This then would compound their condition and have a negative impact on their academic achievement. This on-site health center has been a valuable link to the school as it has promoted prevention and treatment, and has allowed Guidance Counselors to effectively refer and follow up with their students. College Now A unique and special collaboration has been established with College Now This university partnership will support the development and implementation of our school’s College and Carer Readiness Program. The College High School Achievement Program provides academic, social and intellectual opportunities that complement our high school curriculum. All courses offered are college level, credit bearing that are intended to lighten the freshmen college load. Advancement Via Individual Determination PROGRESS HS will participate in AVID training and utilize the AVID curriculum that is based on rigorous standards. It is based on best teaching practices in writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization, and reading, and it is supported by state and national content standards. AVID curriculum will be used in the AVID Elective and content-area classes to guide teachers and students, while planning strategies for success, by focusing on time management and study skills. The program promises to gives our educators real-world strategies for professional learning, rigorous curriculum, and classroom engagement that accelerate the performance of underrepresented students and impact success school wide. As a comprehensive college readiness system, their expertise, ongoing support, and proven outcomes deliver achievement and lifelong advantage for students in college, career, and life. Educators Rising Pre teaching Program We are excited about our partnership with Educators Rising Pre teaching Program. Educators Rising recently partnered with the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and the National Education Association to define the Educators Rising Standards. These are the skills, knowledge, and dispositions that aspiring young educators must cultivate to take their first steps on the path to accomplished teaching. Based on the Educators Rising Standards, we are implementing the EdRising Academy curriculum for our school chapter. The St. Nicks Alliance St. Nicks Alliance serves more than 1,000 Grand Street Campus high school students each year with a seamless continuum of comprehensive services that target the developmental needs of youth as they grow. They seek to positively influence school attendance and attachment, enthusiasm for learning, social-emotional skills and academic and employment self-efficacy. By building steady progress in these areas, they equip young people to graduate from high school and acquire the essential skills for post-secondary success. They work in close partnership with public schools, NYCHA housing developments, community-based organizations and other strategic partners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Peer Group Connection Through Peer Group Connection (PGC), CSS trains school faculty to teach leadership courses to select groups of older students, who in turn educate and support younger students. Our goal is to help schools enable and inspire young people to become engaged leaders who positively influence their peers. The CSS peer-to-peer student leadership model taps into schools’ most underutilized resources – students – and enlists them in strengthening the educational offerings of a school while simultaneously advancing their own learning, growth, and development. This evidence-based program supports and eases students’ successful transition from middle to high school. The program taps into the power of high school juniors and seniors to create a nurturing environment for incoming freshmen. Once per week, pairs of junior and senior peer leaders meet with groups of 10-14 freshmen in outreach sessions designed to strengthen relationships among students across grades. These peer leaders are simultaneously enrolled in a daily, for-credit, year-long leadership course taught by school faculty during regular school hours. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PROGRESS recognizes the diversity of the students attending PROGRESS High School for Professional Careers, including students with disabilities, students with limited English proficiency, gifted students, and educationally disadvantaged students, and will continue to support, endorse and promote a strong commitment to integrating the education of all students into the total school program. PROGRESS High School for Professional Careers and its entire staff share an unshakable belief that all children can learn and an unwavering commitment to make it happen. This statement epitomizes our school’s philosophy and deep belief in our capacity to improve and enhance the educational reform effort at the 850 Grand Street Campus. Progress offers a comprehensive and rigorous curriculum for all English Language Learners. Our 9th through 12th grade students are assigned to beginning, intermediate, advanced and transitional classes in ENL. Computer software programs will be used to augment the ENL curriculum. Classroom library will be expanded in all ENL classrooms. Content-based professional development will be offered to all ENL staff especially as it relates to new English language arts and mathematics performance standards. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. A review of our School Quality Snapshot . demonstrates a need to focus on Credit Accumulation concerns in the 10th grade, graduation rate increase of 3-5% and increased participation in College and Career Readiness activities. Additional focus on AYP subgroups is also underway. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Our SLT will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. In consultation with our Superintendency, we reviewed our collective mission and vision of as well as a break down of the Framework for Great Schools. At this time, we are reiterating a few non-negotiables we believe are essential in creating a Great School. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year: 1. Established coherency of expectations across classrooms about how students learn best. 2. Use of Engage NY, HMH collections, HMH Math, NGSS, and the New York City Social Studies and Science 3. Scope and Sequence to create maps aligned to the Common Core Standards. Insist on lesson plan binders illustrating evidence that each department has modified existing curricula aligned to the CCLS. 4. Teachers receive PD on how to create their unit plans and lesson plans. 5. The school recently revised their uniform lesson plan template to ensure alignment to the 5-30-10 model and the Superintendent's Instructional Framework. 6. Unit plans are revised during inquiry team meetings. Lead teachers review unit plans in their department as well. All curricula will be reviewed by the administration and revised according to our school’s data. Teachers have access to this curricula via Googledocs 7. Maintained open lines of communication with all stakeholders in your building and be a strong instructional leader. It is critical for teachers to have time for common planning and for our PD plan to be aligned to our MOTP data In regard to rigorous instruction, a Common Core aligned curriculum that provides access for all learners is in place for all content areas and an assessment plan must be utilized to drive instruction 8. 9. A supportive environment is maintained through having Town Hall/monthly assemblies and a strong advisory program with a curriculum 10. To maintain strong family and community ties, there needs to be a warm and welcoming environment and a highly functioning SLT/PTA. Trust is developed through transparency and having an open door policy. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K474 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 766 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 41 7 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 17 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 86.9% % Reduced Lunch 16.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 63.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 21.25 3% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 76% 68% 67.3% 0.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 211 205 2 84.1% 1.6% 20.1% 32.5% 0.4% 2.1% 10 41% 6.2 N/A N/A 66% 74% 79.8% 12% N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a thorough review of our school's instructional program as evidenced through the findings of our NYC School Quality Report, Quality Review, Principal Performance Observation visits and Teacher MOTP ratings we have established the following priority needs:  It is vital that we ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data so that individual and groups of students, including the lowest- and highest-achieving students, ELLs, and SWDs, have access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaged. Student performance data trends include a thorough review of student scholarship, Regents exam results, NYSELAT results, student portfolios and IEP's. An emphasis on STEM courses offered at PHS is underway due to lower than average pass rates.  Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  We have continued our effort to ensure that our curricula aligns to the common core standards and citywide instructional expectations and structures are in place to modify them as needed based on feedback from assessments and students’ work products. We have continued to improve instructional practices across classrooms to ensure that diverse learners are consistently provided multiple entry points, strategic scaffolds to support their learning and opportunities to extend their learning with tasks that consistently yield student work products and discussion that reflect higher order thinking. Our priority needs include:  Designing the school’s professional development plan includes monthly offerings around UDL, discussion techniques and other areas related to the school’s instructional focus. Offerings are added to include areas of need surfaced throughout the year.  Teachers attend differentiated PD based on areas of need.  Cabinet meetings revolving around improving the quality of administrative feedback take place.   Ongoing professional development for all instructional staff on questioning and discussion techniques Lesson plan template that includes entry points, modifications and pivotal questions. (Danielson 3b, school belief on how students learn best).  Teacher-lead instructional walk-throughs scheduled every Wednesday to highlight and share best practices with regards to modifications, higher order thinking skills and class discussions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To strengthen implementation of CCLS, the Curriculum Team (teacher leads) will develop rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study and performance tasks to improve rigorous instruction as measured by the development of units of study. 90% of our departments (English, Social Studies, Mathematics, Science, Physical Education, and Foreign Language) will follow the established cycle of inquiry. Collaborations between administration and teacher leadership will determine inquiry groups for a minimum of three (3) identified sub-groups including the school’s instructional focus by the end of June 2019 based on data from the previous academic semester. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Established Cycle of Inquiry protocol will be reviewed and follow by all stakeholders. The PROGRESS HS (PHS) school community will also be made aware of cycle of the inquiry schedule as well as specific group focus (including subgroups). As determined by inquiry group focus December 2018 Inquiry team leads, department leaders, coordinators, and administration Ex. Subgroups, Males, Students with Disabilities (SWD), English as a Second Language (ESL), Lowest third, students identified in specific class rotation Using data from the inquiry team as well as common assessment data, groups will be established to explore and identify proven methods to address student achievement Activities and strategies our school will implement to achieve the identified goals include:  All teachers will be involved in inquiry work during C6 period and Friday modified schedule.  Common Assessments – will be administered in all core courses the weeks of October 19, December 14, February 15 and April 26.  Teacher teams will make revisions to curricula using GoogleDocs.  Modifications for SWD and ELLs will be added to each unit of study.  Cabinet meetings, common planning, inquiry meetings and pre/post observation conferences will include the analysis of student work.  Assistant Principals and teacher leads will participate in structured professional development around analyzing student work. Inquiry Team findings will be reported to the PHS community utilizing department meetings, targeted professional development, PD “intensives”, and whole group Friday Modified Schedule time allocation As determined by inquiry group focus January 2019 Inquiry team leads, department leaders, coordinators, and team members Inquiry teams will utilize department administered common assessments to establish a baseline focus (looking at student work Ex. Subgroups, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  to identify strengths and weaknesses and to establish what instructional adjustment will be implemented) The instructional adjustment will then be implemented and monitored through student and teacher work product Key personnel will share and reflect with the school community- How can you share your work with your colleagues and share practices that have resulted in increased student achievement? Time allocations will include Friday Modified Schedule, Department meetings, co-planning sessions, whole group PD, and inquiry team “intensives” Key personnel will review qualitative and quantitative data to establish what refinements will be made to PHS curriculum to reflect best practices that elicited student achievement of at least 80%. Males, SWD, ESL, Lowest third, students identified in specific class rotation As determined by inquiry group focus Ex. Subgroups, Males, SWD, ESL, Lowest third, students identified in specific class rotation As determined by inquiry group focus Ex. Subgroups, Males, SWD, ESL, Lowest third, students identified in specific class rotation Parents/ February 2019 Department curriculum development members, GoogleDoc team members March 2019 Department curriculum development members, GoogleDoc team members. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  PHS will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core so they can support their children at home.This will be accomplished through a series of quarterly parent workshops, newsletters and online resources. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Caregivers November 2018 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Select staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As part of the project to help inform parents about the Common Core and the impact of parental involvement, a series of four quarterly newsletters will be sent home over the course of the year. The first newsletter will be sent home during the first week of school in August and will describe the basic aspects of the Common Core (See Appendix B). This newsletter will also describe the benefits of Common Core in the classroom, as well as include websites and other resources available for parents to learn more about the topic. This will be a crucial learning point for the parents, since a majority are still unaware of what the Common Core is and how it can be beneficial to their children's learning. The second newsletter will be sent home at the start of the second quarter, in first week of October and will explain the importance of parental involvement. Parental involvement is crucial to a child’s learning achievement. The newsletter will also include information on how parents can get more involved and suggest methods of maintaining a consistent and open communication with their child’s teacher. This newsletter will also include helpful websites and resources in ways that the parents can become involved or how to communicate with their child’s teacher Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include teacher per session, supplies and materials, etc. Participating personnel will include Inquiry team leads, department leaders, department coordinators, PHS administration members, inquiry team members, and PHS support personnel. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Stakeholders will monitor evidence of implementation of inquiry/instructional adjustment. Each marking period will have dedicated professional development, common planning, or professional period time to participate in the inquiry cycle steps. During “intensives” team leaders will have the opportunity to troubleshoot and model best practices when engaging in the inquiry cycle process. Teachers will have the opportunity to model and “fishbowl” best practices, problem solve and review authentic student/teacher work product as well as qualitative and quantitative data. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To track and monitor progress, : ● We have defined a staff outcome goal of reviewing qualitative and quantitative data to establish what refinements will be made to PHS curriculum to reflect best practices that elicited student achievement during the after the first semester (fall 2017). ● We have several leading indicators. One related to CCSS implementation, for example, is the number of teachers involved in inquiry work. ● We have created a project with milestones and deliverables for each of the projects, with an explicit estimate of the contribution that successful completion of each project will make toward student outcome goals. ● Our schools CCRPP committee has developed benchmark implementation goals to guide their work. Monthly debriefing sessions have been scheduled. A comprehensive review (quantifiable mid-point benchmarks ) of credit accumulation, scholarship and Regents passing rates will take place in February 2018. School leaders will monitor for evidence the impact of the inquiry process on student work products through formal and informal observations. Teacher leads and mentors will use the walk through process to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses and recommend strategies based on observations, student work and inquiry meetings. This feedback will inform adjustments to strategies being used. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher leads and mentors will use the walkthrough process to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses and recommend strategies based on observations, student work and inquiry meetings. This feedback will inform adjustments to strategies being used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our priority needs include: Maintaining a nurturing, supportive and respectful environment that is conducive to the academic and personal growth of faculty and students. (QR 1.4) School leaders, parents, and students alike cite the maintenance of a safe environment and the building of school culture as a high priority in the school community. Across classrooms and professional collaborations, respectful language and tones are observed. Students cite influence over several initiatives in the school community, including the revision of the scope and sequence of college exposure. Parents cite the modified Friday schedule, freshman academy, and Saturday and PM school, as initiatives that reflected school leadership had “listened” to them and implemented. As a result, all school constituents feel they have a strong reciprocal communication and influence on key elements of the school community. We are now positioned to increase activities that align with our college and careers initiatives. In student interviews, many students cited leadership as a school value and cited the various ways that students were pushed to be leaders, ranging from self-advocacy at the classroom level to opportunities to participate in programs and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  student council. As a result, students feel that there is a focus on supporting them in gaining the ability to demonstrate behaviors that will help them succeed in the world beyond high school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Ensure that by June, 2019, we will improve 4-Year College Readiness Index by 10%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Collaborative Team Teaching ensures that students master specific skills and concepts in the general education curriculum, as well as ensuring that their special education needs are being met including meeting annual goal and curriculum goals. ____________________________________________  Curricula in core subject areas will include Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies and modifications to their existing curricula. Lesson plan template will include a components for; UDL, modifications, differentiation, role of the paraprofessional or co-teacher and entry points. _____________________________________________  Teachers will receive intensive professional development on different co-teaching models, UDL and differentiation strategies on a weekly basis beginning September, 2015. _____________________________________________  Have high expectations for students with disabilities. Meet the student’s needs to enable the student to ACCESS, participate and progress in the general education curriculum to the maximum extent possible. _____________________________________________  Ensure that special education is a service, rather than a place where students are sent. Provide appropriate special education services and supplementary supports and services in the general education classroom, whenever appropriate. Provide effective systems of school-wide, classroom, small group and individualized systems of academic/behavior supports. Ensure that all those who work with students with disabilities have the skills and knowledge necessary to help such students to meet academic and functional goals. Prepare students for their transition to Higher Education, Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students _______ All students _____ All students ______ SWD SWD September, 2018 - June, 2019 September, 2018 - June, 2019 September, 2018 - June, 2019 September, 2018 - June, 2019 All teachers __________ All teachers __________ Department AP’s ____________ Special Ed. AP September, 2018 - June, 2019 ___________ Special Ed. AP All students AP’s September, 2018 - June, 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  adult living, working and learning to lead productive independent adult lives to the maximum extent possible. ___________________________________________ Our vision for a single, seamless and unified service delivery system for all students, especially the lowest 1/3, ELLs, and SWD which embraces the firm legal mandate to educate students with disabilities alongside their non-disabled peers to the maximum extent appropriate. It establishes the requirement that all students be held to high academic and behavioral standards. Ensure that parents have meaningful opportunities to participate in the development, review and revision of the individualized education program (IEP). Ensure that families have meaningful opportunities to participate in the education of their children at school and at home. SWD 3b – Parent and Family Engagement AP - Special Educ. September, 2018 - June, 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June, 2016, the School Leadership (SLT), PHS Parents Teachers Association (PTA) and faculty will improve parent participation, as measured by attendance, in school activities, including PTA meetings and Parent-Teacher Conferences by 10%. PHS GUIDELINES FOR INCREASED ENGAGEMENT Programs that successfully connect with families and community invite involvement, are welcoming, and address specific parent and community needs.  Parent involvement programs that are effective in engaging diverse families recognize, respect, and address cultural and class differences.  Effective programs to engage families and community embrace a philosophy of partnership. The responsibility for children’s educational development is a collaborative enterprise among parents, school staff, and community members. Welcoming All Families into the School Community  Schedule Open Houses and Parent/Student Orientations  Develop family-friendly customer service guidelines to be used by school staff.  Set up a welcome center in room 205 for parents/school visitors. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26   Plan meet-and-greet events to introduce families to school staff.  Provide staff training in race/class/cultural sensitivity and awareness.  Make time to address parents’ questions and concerns. Communicating Effectively  Track parent-teacher communication: how often do families hear from school leaders/teachers? How often do they meet in person? What do they discuss? (Training Topic)  Establish guidelines for regular communications between school and home, such as monthly calls from teachers, home visits, weekly newsletters, etc.  Collaborate with teachers and staff to develop a parent handbook.  Facilitate parental review of their children’s work. (Training Topic)  Establish and publicize parent visiting hours and guidelines for contacting teachers. Supporting Student Success  Provide parents an active role in reviewing student work. (Training Topic)  Provide parents with an overview of the curriculum, expected student learning outcomes, assessment methods, and expectations for parent participation.  Initiate a program of student-led parent-teacher conferences.  Frequently communicate policies and procedures for addressing parent concerns.  Establish and publicize a set of parent rights.  Provide handbooks that comprehensively explain all school policies.  Highlight successful changes in school practices that result from parent input.  Distribute, review and analyze annual parent survey - address areas of concern.  Establish a parent team focused on school improvement.  Encourage parents to share concerns/ideas for school improvement. Collaborating with Community  Sponsor a student community service projects.  Host school breakfasts for civic leaders and local businesses. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include P/F Set-aside funds and Title I School Improvement funds (Title I 1003a). Participating personnel will include Inquiry team leads, department leaders, department coordinators, PHS administration members, community coordinator, inquiry team members, and PHS support personnel. Stakeholders will monitor evidence of implementation of inquiry/instructional adjustment. Each marking period will have dedicated professional development, common planning, or professional period time to participate in the inquiry cycle steps. The principal, AP Supervisor Special Education and Instructional coaches will collaborate with teachers to co-construct and Danielson Framework, Domains and competencies will be articulated during department, faculty, common planning periods, in observations and informal feedback, and in the new instructional professional development weekly newsletter, PROGRESS Newsletter . Lead Instructional Teachers will support CCLS, Teacher Effectiveness (Charlotte Danielson) and pedagogies that support special populations in a once a week after-school one-hour session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will provide direct, explicit strategy instruction daily, which consists of: ● identifying text for instruction, which include both information and literary texts; ● giving explanation, modeling, scaffolding, and helping students practice to become independent in the use of the strategy; ● assuring students record outcomes of strategy use in their personal portfolios/work folders, (e) have students collaborate within teams and the whole class for outcomes of strategy use and comprehension activities. ● Provide opportunity for student discussions To track and monitor progress ● We have defined a student outcome benchmark (midpoint) of increasing the number of students that effectively utilize close reading strategies to cite evidence during discussions by 500 students. This will be accomplished by February, 2018. ● Our schools CCRPP committee has developed benchmark implementation goals to guide their work. Monthly debriefing sessions have been scheduled. By February, 2019, school leaders will monitor for evidence of the impact of the instructional focus on student work products through formal and informal observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Teacher leads and mentors will use the walkthrough process to identify areas of strengths and weaknesses and recommend strategies based on observations, student work and inquiry meetings. This feedback will inform adjustments to strategies being used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have continued to improve instructional practices across classrooms to ensure that diverse learners are consistently provided multiple entry points, strategic scaffolds to support their learning and opportunities to extend their learning with tasks that consistently yield student work products and discussion that reflect higher order thinking. Our priority needs include:  Designing the school’s professional development plan includes monthly offerings around UDL, discussion techniques and other areas related to the school’s instructional focus. Offerings are added to include areas of need surfaced throughout the year.  Teachers attend differentiated PD based on areas of need.  Cabinet meetings revolving around improving the quality of administrative feedback take place. ● Lesson plan template that includes entry points, modifications and pivotal questions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  ● Ongoing professional development for all instructional staff on questioning and discussion techniques (Danielson 3b, school belief on how students learn best). ● Teacher-lead instructional walk-throughs scheduled every Wednesday to highlight and share best practices with regards to modifications, higher order thinking skills and class discussions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Effective School Leadership: By June, 2019 95% of all staff will participate in structured trainings intended to develop their professional growth by developing and delivering the instructional and guidance support that drives student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our professional development structured trainings use research based instructional techniques to support and improve student learning and help our students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional Development will take place through school-wide PD, Targeted PD, Intensive PD, Campus Wide PD, Weekly Instructional Walk-Throughs, Student For a Day, PHS Annual Planning Conference, Common Planning, Teacher Team Meetings, Mentoring, ASCD Conferences, IO Education, Promethean Board, Quarterly Mock Quality Reviews, Pedagogy Book Studies and Grade Level Meetings. The themes of Student Engagement through discussions, Rigor, Literacy and social emotional learning will be interwoven through all facets of Professional Development. These focus areas will allow faculty to improve student learning by increasing teacher effectiveness, but serve each student individually. In addition to these focal points teachers will also engage in developmental opportunities based on Framework For Greater Schools, the Danielson’s Framework and the Common Core Learning Standards. All Faculty Sept 2018- June 2019 Research Based Learning All Faculty Sept 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Asst. Principal, Staff Development Coordinator, Department Leads, Selected faculty Principal, Asst. Principal, Staff Development Coordinator, Department Leads, Selected faculty Research Based Learning is a new component to the Professional Development Plan this year. Based on ADVANCE data and informal observations, supervisors will recommend teachers to attend Inquiry Based Learning on Friday’s during Targeted PD and if requested in lieu of Whole Group PD and/or Campus-Wide PD. During this time teachers will be able to research different pedagogical strategies within their content area and plan a coherent lesson based on their findings. Teachers will use weteachnyc.gov as a resource to learn and apply their findings to the focus area. To hold teachers accountable, there will be a chart of dates and strategies being tried by teachers that attended the Research Based learning. Attendees will apply the research they discovered during their meeting and open up their classroom as a learning lab for all other teachers to learn the information applied the following week. Social Emotional Learning 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32 All Faculty Sept 2018- Principal, Asst. Principal, Staff Development Coordinator, Department Leads, Selected faculty, CHCF CBO Reps Principal, Asst. Principal, Staff Development Coordinator, Department Leads, Selected faculty During the months of November and December the PD Calendar will focus on Social Emotional Learning for staff development. LGBTQ Safe Spaces, Guidance and Safety, Ruler/ Mood Meter and CHCF Restorative Circles are the different learning sessions developed to satisfy the social emotional learning of PROGRESS staff members. June 2019 Campus Wide Professional Development All Campus Sept 2018- Faculty June 2019 Campus Wide Professional Development will take place the last Friday of every month by PROGRESS, EBT and Legal Studies High Schools. Each school will assign an instructional lead from each department and collaborate in leading professional learning sessions for their respective departments. The professional learning focuses will be based on the Framework for Greater Schools and encompass each school’s vision, including feedback from each school’s Quality Review. The allocated time will allow the campus to share best practices amongst each department and guide the staff in each school’s strengths. The Instructional Leads from each school will collaborate and plan prior to the month’s Campus Wide Professional Development. After each monthly session the Instructional Leads will meet with administration and reflect upon the session and plan next steps to improve the professional learning within the campus. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school that takes great pride in our ability to form partnerships, PROGRESS will do whatever it takes to work closely together to make sure every single student succeeds. ‰ BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS • Parent center is always open, full of interesting learning materials to borrow • Home visits are made to every new family • Activities honor families' contributions • Building is open to community use and social services are available to families ‰ LINKING TO LEARNING • All family activities connect to what students are learning • Parents and teachers look at student work and test results together - Specific support will be provided during our school's Open Houses • Community groups offer tutoring and homework programs at the school • Students' work is on-line (PupilPath) with a scoring guide ‰ ADDRESSING DIFFERENCES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  • Translators are readily available • Teachers use books and materials about families' cultures • PTA includes all families • Local groups help staff reach parents ‰ SUPPORTING ADVOCACY • There is a clear, open process for resolving problems • Teachers contact families each month to discuss student progress • Student-led parent-teacher conferences are held three times a year SHARING POWER • Parents and teachers research issues such as prejudice and tracking • Parent group is focused on improving student achievement • Families are involved in all major decisions • Parents can use the school's phone, copier, fax, and computers • Staff work with local organizers to improve the school and neighborhood . Additionally, PROGRESS seeks to provide suggestions for home conditions that support learning at each grade level. • Workshops, videotapes, computerized phone messages on parenting and child rearing at each age and grade level. • Parent education and other courses or training for parents (e.g., GED, college credit, family literacy.) • Family support programs to assist families with health, nutrition, and other services. • Home visits at transition points to pre-school, elementary, middle, and high school. Neighborhood meetings to help families understand schools and to help schools understand families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include P/F Set-aside funds and Title I School Improvement funds (Title I 1003a). Participating personnel will include the principal, AP Supervisors and Instructional coaches who will collaborate with teachers to co-construct and Danielson Framework, Domains and competencies will be articulated during department, faculty, common planning periods, in observations and informal feedback, and in the new instructional professional development weekly newsletter, PROGRESS Newsletter . Lead Instructional Teachers will support CCLS, Teacher Effectiveness (Charlotte Danielson) and pedagogies that support special populations in a once a week after-school one-hour session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To track and monitor progress, . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  We have defined a benchmark (midpoint) of increasing the number of teachers participating in structured trainings. This will be accomplished by February, 2019. ● We have several leading indicators. (One related to CCSS implementation, for example, is the retention rate of teachers with fewer than five years of service in grades 9-12). ● Our schools CCRPP committee has developed benchmark implementation goals to guide their work. Monthly debriefing sessions have been scheduled. By February, 2019, school leaders will monitor for evidence of the impact of the professional development program. The Principal and Cabinet will identify areas of strengths and weaknesses and recommend strategies based on observations, written feedback reports and professional observation. . This feedback will inform adjustments to strategies being used. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily/Weekly Teacher Attendance and Survey Responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. X X X 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To be college and career ready, students must master a wide range of knowledge and a diverse set of skills that range from specific content knowledge in certain academic and technical areas to knowledge of college and work trajectories, environments, and eligibility requirements to collaboration skills and resilience. School staff will consider all dimensions when developing plans to improve college and career readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  By June 2019, the college and career teacher team will collaboratively develop rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study and performance tasks to improve rigorous instruction as measured by the development of three (3) units of study. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Ninth Grade Students 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principals Our entire school community is dedicated to preparing PHS students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is mutual respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. As such our college and career initiatives include a focus on our incoming students. Detailed below are the actions and strategies our school will undertake for 9 th year students: 1. Students will develop a four year plan 2. Students will learn how to use the U. S. Department of labor’s informative career website to comprehend the best careers for which to prepare. This is the best website for the student research because it is complete, concise and easy to use 3. Students will practice developing an Education Plan that is career path specific in preparation for the creation of a comprehensive post-secondary Education Plan in the 12 th grade 4. Students will visit at least two campuses. One Independent College and one Public College. 5. Students will have at least two college speakers 6. Seminars will be conducted in freshmen academy to explore the various college and post-secondary options there are. They will be exposed to a wide variety of internet resources 7. Students will learn how to conduct on-line research with respect to college and careers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  8. Students will be given one college and career project 9. Student seminars will be provided to foster an understanding of college requirements. The workshop will assist students to understand that the core academic skills required of college are the same skills expected for work and family support. 10. In the spring term students will update their ten year plan 11. Students will experience navigating college websites The Progress HS CA4A team prototyped a Campus Visit Engagement Sequence within existing support structures in freshman program. The team piloted a “before/during/after” sequence of activities in Mr. Arias and Mr. Gonzalez’s sections of Freshman Academy. The team studied and adapted their prototype through student visits to Kingsborough and La Guardia Community Colleges in Spring 2017. The team also oversaw... ● launch and integration of the Bridge for All program, to bring near-peer support to the application, aid and enrollment processes for graduating seniors and to offer an innovative employment opportunity to recent alumni ● onboarding in LINCT for All, an academic intervention for targeted seniors to increase number of graduating students who meet college-readiness benchmarks in English and Math ● expansion of campus visit opportunities for junior and senior students The PROGRESS CA4A team will expand and re-brand as the Cohort College Advisor (CCA) team, in order to lead work in the following areas: ● spread / scale the Campus Visit Engagement sequence to reach all students in grades 9 and 10 ● study growth / integration of the program, and evaluate impact on credit accumulation, graduation rate, and college readiness ● support launch of partnership with Opportunity Network, to build career exploration into postsecondary planning work in grades 9 and 10. ● alignment of work with existing CBO partners in the building, with a focus on St. Nick’s Alliance. Select CCA team members will sit on leadership cabinet, to help align their work with leadership-level decision-making about school programming and budget. CCA will support sustainability of Bridge for All and roll-out of LINCT for All programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 parents 9/18-6/19 Asst. Principal- Parent Coord. ENL Students 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principals, Coordinator, Parent Coord. Parent Education/Engagement activities: Fostering Communication: School and families engage in an open exchange of information regarding student progress, school-wide goals, and support activities Encouraging Parent Involvement: Parents have diverse and meaningful roles in the school community and their children’s achievement Creating Welcoming Schools: Creating a welcoming, positive school climate with the commitment of the entire school community Collaborating Effectively: School community works together to make decisions about the academic and personal growth of students through school-wide goals. Schools foster collaborations with community-based organizations to create a vibrant, fulfilling environment for students and families. Students in our bilingual program receive ESL classes along with core classes. The Math department provides five classes of bilingual Math. The Social Studies department provides five classes of history instruction. The Science department provides five classes of science instruction. The school has many extracurricular activities that involve all students in the school, including ELLs. Extracurricular activities vary from academic to artistic in nature. Our school has various PSAL teams, after school clubs, and tutoring. We promote our clubs and other extracurricular activities to our ELLs through the school as a whole and via our ESL/Bilingual classes. You will find our ELLs participating in our baseball, basketball, soccer, wrestling, volleyball teams, school orchestra, choir, as well as participating in student government, yearbook, and various student committees. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, PROGRESS will create a welcoming school climate that promotes parent leadership and engagement. All parent outreach and monitoring will be supervised by the Principal and Assistant Principal, Organization. A School Secretary, Parent Coordinator, Family Worker, Community Assistant and Supervising School Aide will be assigned to assist. They will: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Provide a personal greeting and welcome packet for all parents visiting the school, including a community services directory, important school contact information, school calendar and resources to local businesses.  Have teachers make personal contacts with families through e-mail, phone calls or home visits.  Hold an open house, prior to school opening, at which families can meet their children’s teachers, tour the school building and meet other parents.  Provide transportation and child care to enable families to attend school-sponsored, family-involvement events.  Offer translators to welcome and assist families during school activities. CREATE A WELCOMING SCHOOL CLIMATE  Provide workshops and materials for parents on typical development and appropriate parent and school expectations for various age groups.  Print suggestions for parents on home conditions that support learning at each grade level.  Partner with local agencies to provide regular parenting workshops on nutrition, family recreation or communication.  Have school personnel make home visits at transition points such as preschool and elementary, middle and high school to help families and students understand what to expect. ESTABLISH EFFECTIVE SCHOOL-TO-HOME AND HOME-TO-SCHOOL COMMUNICATION.  Provide printed information for parents on homework policies and on monitoring and supporting student work at home. Send home folders of student work weekly or monthly for parent review and comment.   Develop electronic grade booklets so families can frequently monitor their children’s progress.  Clearly communicate school policies to all families in their home language.  Establish formal mechanisms for families to communicate to administrators and teachers as needed (e.g., direct phone numbers, e-mail addresses, weekly hours for families to call or meet).  Create a families “suggestion or comment” box (electronic and onsite) for families to anonymously provide their questions, concerns and recommendations. STRENGTHEN FAMILIES’ KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS TO SUPPORT AND EXTEND THEIR CHILDREN’S LEARNING AT HOME AND IN THE COMMUNITY.  Provide training and materials for parents on how to improve children’s study skills or learning in various academic subjects.  Make regular homework assignments that require students to discuss with their families what they are learning in class.  Provide a directory of community resources and activities that link to student learning skills and talents, including summer programs for students.  Offer workshops to inform families of the high expectations and standards children are expected to meet in each grade level. Provide ways for families to support the expectations and learning at home.  Engage families in opportunities to work with their children in setting their annual academic, college and career goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  ENGAGE FAMILIES IN SCHOOL PLANNING, LEADERSHIP AND MEANINGFUL VOLUNTEER OPPORTUNITIES.  Create roles for parents on all decision-making and advisory committees, properly training them for the areas in which they will serve (e.g., curriculum, budget or school safety).  Provide equal representation for parents on school governing bodies.  Conduct a survey of parents to identify volunteer interests, talents and availability, matching these resources to school programs and staff-support needs.  Create volunteer recognition activities such as events, certificates and thank-you cards.  Establish a parent telephone tree to provide school information and encourage interaction among parents.  Structure a network that links every family with a designated parent representative CONNECT STUDENTS AND FAMILIES TO COMMUNITY RESOURCES THAT STRENGTHEN AND SUPPORT STUDENTS’ LEARNING AND WELL-BEING.  Through school-community partnerships, facilitate families’ access to community-based programs (e.g., health care and human services) to ensure that families have resources to be involved in their children’s education.  Establish school-business partnerships to provide students mentoring, internships and onsite, experiential learning opportunities.  Connect students and families to service-learning projects in the community.  Invite community partners to share resources at annual open houses or parent-teacher conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include P/F Set-aside funds and Title I School Improvement funds (Title I 1003a). Participating personnel will include Inquiry team leads, department leaders, department coordinators, PHS administration members, parent coordinator, inquiry team members, and PHS support personnel. Funding will be provided to cover all costs related to college readiness supports, college visitations and application fees (based on need). Additional support will be provided to students and families during parent workshops, seminars and planning sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  By June 2019, the Ninth grade teacher team will collaboratively develop rigorous CCLS-aligned units of study and performance tasks to improve rigorous instruction as measured by the development of three (3) units of study. As such our college and career initiatives include a focus on our incoming students. Detailed below are the actions and strategies our school will undertake for 9 th year students: First, our planning team will consider the performance targets set for the academic semester(mid-point) ending January 31, 2017. More specifically, we will review student participation rates (total of five per student) in advisories, workshops, training and college visitations. We will then examine if the target(s) rigorous enough? If the target was not met, the team will consider whether or not the same focus will be a priority concern for the current and next year. Next, the planning team will review current performance as described in the school Quality Review and Learning Survey reports. The school performance frameworks provide information about school performance based on four key performance indicators: academic achievement, academic growth, academic growth gaps, and post secondary and workforce readiness Identifying performance trends involves collaboratively analyzing and interpreting the data to describe the performance of the school. Data analysis will consider each of the performance indicator areas: student achievement (status), student academic growth, gaps in growth by disaggregated student groups, and, post secondary/workforce readiness. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student participation rates (total of five per student) in advisories, workshops, training and college visitations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our NYC School Survey and our school-based questionnaire results students and parents feel supported in our comprehensive college preparation program. The school has a partnership with the College Now program that provides juniors and seniors with the opportunity to earn college credits for rigorous classes they are taking at Progress High School. There are numerous rigorous college ready course offerings, such as Advanced Placement, and partnerships with local hospitals to support the pre-med program. We are excited about our involvement with the Advancement Via Individual Determination Program (AVID). · Teacher mentoring pairs first year teachers with veterans to foster professional growth that results in improved student learning outcomes. Teacher mentors provide mentees with ongoing support around classroom management, curricular development, and instructional delivery. Teachers engage in joint work and reflective dialogue. There is a commitment to on-going work, implementing new learning, and documenting the growth of staff and students. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  school’s program is created to allow teachers three hours of weekly professional development to address student needs. · The school disseminates a monthly professional newsletter to the staff that includes the school’s instructional focus, how students learn best, school goals, and upcoming events. To partner with parents in the support of students for college and career readiness, the school shares and promotes high expectations via School Messenger, parent meetings, open houses, parent workshops, PupilPath progress reports. There are numerous celebrations of parent, teacher and student achievement, such as Parent Recognition, Teacher Professional Development Recognition Day, and the National Honor Society. There is a successful performing arts and afterschool program to support student talents and interests. · During student meeting, students expressed they had a strong work ethic and discussed the work they did in class such as argumentative essays and annotating. They stated that they can email teachers through PupilPath message them and ask questions. Teachers approach them after class and provide progress reports. Teachers are available after school and on Saturdays for make-up work, Regents exams preparation and tutoring and are also available during lunch. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the guidance team will increase the number of parents/caregivers registered for online student reporting (Pupil Path) and Skedula by over 30%. . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Distribute a biweekly letter to let parents know how meaningful their involvement is. This will include a back-to-school night speech, highlighting key points of parent involvement Parent/ Sept 2018 Caregivers Increase the number of teachers attending PTA meetings. Teachers generally understand the value of parent involvement, so enlist their support—chances are they’ll be happy to help convey the importance of participation to other parents Teachers/ Nov. 2018 Parent/ Caregivers Increase the number of emails and newsletters to highlight the benefits of parent involvement. Teachers/ Jan 2019 Parent/ Caregivers Involve the Cabinet in Parent trainings, workshops and planning conferences Principal/ Feb 2019 Asst. Principals/ Teachers/ Parent/ Caregivers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal/Parent Coord. Asst. Principals/ Teachers Principal/Parent Coord. Asst. Principals/ Teachers Principal/Parent Coord. Asst. Principals/ Teachers Principal/Parent Coord. Asst. Principals/ Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The St. Nicks Alliance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  St. Nicks Alliance serves more than 1,000 Grand Street Campus high school students each year with a seamless continuum of comprehensive services that target the developmental needs of youth as they grow. They seek to positively influence school attendance and attachment, enthusiasm for learning, social-emotional skills and academic and employment self-efficacy. By building steady progress in these areas, they equip young people to graduate from high school and acquire the essential skills for post-secondary success. They work in close partnership with public schools, NYCHA housing developments, community-based organizations and other strategic partners. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will include P/F Set-aside funds and Title I School Improvement funds (Title I 1003a). Participating personnel will include Inquiry team leads, department leaders, department coordinators, PHS administration members, parent coordinator, inquiry team members, and PHS support personnel. Funding will be provided to cover all costs related to parent support, transportation, food, conferences, and PTA meeting related costs. Additional support will be provided to students and families during parent workshops, seminars and planning sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To track and monitor progress, . By February, 2019. the guidance team will collaboratively develop an action plan that will increase the number of parents/caregivers registered for online student reporting (Pupil Path) and Skedula by over 30%.The Principal and Cabinet will identify areas of strengths and weaknesses and recommend strategies based on observations, written feedback reports and professional observation. . This feedback will inform adjustments to strategies being used. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent participation in PTA meetings, trainings, Open School Week, and 1:1 consultations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Incoming freshmen scoring level one and two on their junior high school ELA NY State exam are scheduled with a second English course. Mathematics Incoming freshmen are grouped according to their 8 th grade NY State Math exam scores and are scheduled for a second math course. Math teachers use this second math course to diagnose and address student deficiencies. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students that have failed the ELA Regents are scheduled for an English Regents review course. PM (after school) school is offered to students needing extra help and regents review. “Lunch and Learn” Interested English teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment. Students failing the algebra regents are assigned to a four term algebra curriculum. Teachers review the algebra regents results, use acuity and common assessments to identify students areas of weakness and target those areas throughout the semester. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Additional Course – Reduced Class Size. Use of Castle Learning and ilearn. Additional Course – Reduced Class Size. small group, one-to-one, and small group tutoring Additional Course – Reduced Class Size. Use of Castle Learning and iLearn. one-to-one, and small group tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Meeting 45 minutes daily with the aim of improving reading comprehension and writing skills. This course meets daily for 45 minutes and is scheduled in each student’s program Two times per-week. Periods 3 and 7 Meeting 45 minutes daily with the aim of improving reading comprehension and writing skill This course meets daily for 45 minutes and is scheduled in each student’s program - Two times per-week.Periods 3 and 7 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  “Lunch and Learn” Interested Math teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment small group tutoring Weekly Additional Course – Reduced Class Size Saturday Academy is offered from 9-12 to all students in need of extra help, remediation and regents review “Lunch and Learn”, Interested Science teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment Saturday Academy is offered from 9-12 to all students in need of extra help, remediation, regents review and lab make-up “Lunch and Learn”, Interested History teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment Science Students who did not meet the Regents’ requirements for science are scheduled for a review class that meets daily for 45 minutes. Social Studies Students who did not meet the regents’ requirements for U.S. History and or Global Studies are scheduled for a support/elective class that meets daily for 45 minutes Additional Course – Reduced Class Size. Use of Castle Learning and iLearn. one-to-one, and small group This course meets daily for 45 minutes and is scheduled in each student’s program - Two times per-week. tutoring Weekly Additional Course – Reduced Class Size. Use of Castle Learning and iLearn. one-to-one, and small group This course meets daily for 45 minutes and is scheduled in each student’s program - Two times per-week tutoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher, Advisor and Counselor referrals Individual, group and family counseling Monthly Attend PPT meetings; crisis intervention in emergency situations; provides assistance and mediation between student-parent, student-teacher, student-student relationships; connects parents and students to recreational, educational, medical, and self-empowering programs and services; conducts parent outreach and makes appropriate referrals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 45 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 1) Academic Programs & educational support services, including 1:1 Laptop Loan Program 2) Basic/emergency supplies 3) Extended library hours 4) Counseling services 5) Parental involvement/Outreach 6) Intervention programs access school programs 7) Transportation - Metrocard for students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51 Academic Programs & educational support services, including 1:1 Laptop Loan Program 2) Basic/emergency supplies 3) Extended library hours 4) Counseling services 5) Parental involvement/Outreach 6) Intervention programs access school programs 7) Transportation - Metrocard for students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school's strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified:  Review BEDS Reports: The BEDS Survey reports contain teacher certification information and will help principals determine if teachers are assigned to their certification area(s) according to HQ requirements.  Consider the Conversion Program: The Conversion program helps teachers certified in a non-shortage area subject obtain certification in a shortage area subject.  Encourage teachers to take the HOUSSE: As a reminder, general education teachers beyond their first year of certification or teaching can only take the HOUSSE if they are incidental teaching or are part of the middle school experiment in organizational change. Additionally, some ways in which teachers of core academic subjects can demonstrate subject matter competency for assignments?  Holding a NYS teaching certificate in the core academic subject(s); OR  If beyond the first year of certification or teaching, using the HOUSSE (High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation) in the core academic subject they are teaching; OR  Holding an undergraduate major or graduate degree or their equivalents in the core academic subject; OR  Having passed a Content Specialty Test (CST) in the subject or a NYC Board of Examiners test in the subject. PHS will attend all NYCDOE Recruitment fairs, utilize Teacher Finder and collaborate with Teaching Colleges to recruit qualified teachers. We will continue to work closely with our BN Support Center Director of Personnel to identify and staff our school. Strategies for recruitment and retention include:  Support the recruiting, hiring, and training of highly qualified teachers, including teachers who became highly qualified through state and local alternative routes to certification. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53   Comprehensive teacher recruitment utilizing DOE Teacher Finder and attendance at all job fairs  Weekly meetings (retention) with Principal and mentors to debrief and review any outstanding concerns.    Provide instruction in methods of teaching children with special needs. (August 2016 pre-trainingof new Improve classroom management skills. (August 2016 pre-training of new teachers) Include instruction in the use of data and assessments to inform and instruct classroom practice. teachers)  Are high quality, sustained, intensive, and classroom-focused in order to have a positive and lasting impact  "High-quality" professional development activities are developed through the extensive participation of teachers, teacher leads, assistant principals, parents, and coordinators of schools, with the goal being the improvement and increased teachers' knowledge of the academic subjects they teach.  Professional development activities will advance teacher understanding of effective instructional strategies that are:  Based on scientifically based research.  Strategies for improving student academic achievement or substantially increasing the knowledge and teaching skills of teachers.  Aligned with and directly related to citywide instructional expectations, academic content standards, student academic achievement standards, and assessments.  They will also take into consideration "highly qualified" regulations and should enable teachers to become highly qualified.  These activities will simultaneously give teachers, assistant principals, and administrators the knowledge and skills necessary to provide students the opportunity to meet challenging state learning standards. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development plan aims to use research based instructional techniques to support and improve student learning and help our students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional Development will take place through school-wide PD, Department PD, Mentoring and Department Meetings. The themes of Student Engagement through discussions, Rigor and Literacy will be interwoven through all facets of Professional Development. These focus areas will allow faculty, paraprofessional and other support staff to improve student learning by increasing teacher effectiveness. In addition to these focal points teachers will also engage in developmental opportunities based on Danielson’s Framework and the Common Core Learning Standards. External resources such as North Brooklyn Field Support Center Institutes and internal resources such as teacher expertise will be used to provide differentiated professional development opportunities. Using our modified school schedule teachers will meet twice a month for a three hour block of time to attend Professional Development sessions intended to; strengthen teacher competency in elements of the framework for teaching, deepen teacher understanding and knowledge of the Common Core Learning Standards and assume best practices for implementation. Our School Monthly Professional Development Focus will be established by a team of administrators and teachers to design targeted professional development activities; will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools. The monthly focus will be evident in Teacher Teams, Monthly Assessments, Professional Walk-Though, Grade team Meetings and Inter-visitations. The cabinet will review and revise the professional development plan on a monthly basis to assess progress and make any changes necessary based on data collected. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  The School Principal will attend on- going staff development offered by the Superintendent's office. Additional required training is offered by the Office of Academic Policy and our Legal Division. Assistant Principal's will attend all Brooklyn North Field Support Center (BNFCS) trainings. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher- Leads and Teacher Coordinators are an important component of our Leadership Cabinet. They assist in determining the multiple assessment measures and the professional development recommended to ensure the use of assessment results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X X n/a n/a X n/a X Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 594,281 $16,979 n/a n/a 17230 n/a 5,021,208X X X n/a n/a X n/a X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Progress High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Consistent with our overarching PIP goal , we will increase the number of parents/caregivers registered for online student reporting (Pupil Path) and Skedula. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Progress HS will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Our Annual Title I Parent Meeting took place on September 29, 2016. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Progress HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 1. Rationale One of the school's goals is to raise student achievement by providing the students the skills, strategies and confidence to meet proficiency levels in all content areas by passing regents exams and accumulating credits. It also aims to help our ELLs strengthen their English skills in order for them to do well on all subject area classes, including math, science, and Social Studies. Language acquisition is the primary goal with an emphasis on the rhetorical modes of writing. We also work on building students academic language so they can navigate the demands of the content areas. The primary focus of these sessions is to provide effective guidance so that students will be able to grasp the content, concepts, and skills needed to develop their English language skills – skills they will need to pass all classes and Regents exams across subject areas. The students will then be given the option to take the other content area exams in their native Spanish language. The English Regents being the only exception. As to the process, students are identified as ELLs upon enrolment via their last NYSESLAT score or their home language identification survey. If students who are ELLs are enrolled in the school, the Bilingual/ESL guidance counselor schedules students depending on their last NYSESLAT score and the mandated hours of instruction in the parent’s program of choice. When a student is new to the New York City Public School system, parents complete a home language identification survey where they indicate the primary language spoken at home. If the primary language spoken at home is a language other than English, students are given the LAB-R within five days by our Bilingual/ESL program coordinator (certified ESL teacher) to identify if they are indeed ELLs. The ESL coordinator gives parents an orientation describing the programs available to ELLs with a focus on helping parents make an educated choice when choosing their program of choice. Our ELL curriculum is aligned with the New York State Standards for ELA and ELL. The focus of this instruction is language acquisition and conceptual development. The program seeks to service students by offering basic literature, grammar and language skills. The curriculum focuses on word acquisition. Teachers utilize written exercises, journal writing, Read-Aloud, Independent Reading, oral presentation and other means of assessment and delivery of information. Our target goal is to have students pass the regents exam during their junior year. The program seeks to make students proficient at English as measured by the NYSESLAT exam. Students in our bilingual program receive ESL classes along with core classes. The Math department provides five classes of bilingual Math. The Social Studies department provides five classes of history instruction. The Science department provides five classes of science instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The school has many extracurricular activities that involve all students in the school, including ELLs. Extracurricular activities vary from academic to artistic in nature. Our school has various PSAL teams, after school clubs, and tutoring. We promote our clubs and other extracurricular activities to our ELLs through the school as a whole and via our ESL/Bilingual classes. You can find our ELLs participating in our baseball, basketball, soccer, wrestling, volleyball teams, school orchestra, choir, as well as participating in student government, yearbook, and various student committees. 2. Subgroups and Grade Levels The ESL program is not organized by grade level, but by proficiency level as identified by the latest NYSESLAT score. There are 2 classes for each of the beginning, intermediate, and advanced levels. The different subgroups are: Students with Disabilities (SWD), Bottom 1/3, By gender, Hispanics, Other Language Groups 3. A. After School - 42 sessions- Tuesdays and Thursdays in the Computer Room 297 (3:00-4:30 pm) focusing on United States and Global History using the A Plus computer program. Start Date: October 4, 2018 End Date: June 13, 2019 Number of teachers : 1 bilingual teacher certified in Social Studies content area B. After School -97 sessions of ESL Enrichment and Regents ELA Preparation-Monday to Thursday (2:50 to 4:00 pm) Start Date: October 4, 2018 End Date: June 13, 2019 Number of teachers: 1 Certified ESL teacher C. Saturday School - 24 Sessions- every Saturday (9:00 to 12:00 a.m.) focusing on English and Math Start Date: November 10, 2018 End Date: June 15, 2019 Number of teachers: 1 certified English teacher and 1 bilingual teacher certified in Math content area - covering two groups covering two groups. The focus of instruction of the first group (15 students) will incorporate strategies with an emphasis on paragraph and essay composition. The 2nd group (15 students) will focus on responses to literature strategies in preparation for the Common Core English Regents. 4. Language of Instruction - English for ESL afterschool and English Saturday / Spanish and English for Social Studies Afterschool and Math Saturday school 5. Number and Types of Certified Teachers - 3 certified content area bilingual teachers for Social studies, Math, and English afterschool and Saturday school 1 certified ESL teacher for ESL afterschool Afterschool - A plus program, differentiated materials that are NYSESLAT and Regents-based, use of technology such as Promethean boards, computers, RIGOR program, use of software like First Words for ESL designed to teach key English Vocabulary by Essential Skills company, Castle Learning Online, among others. Our ESL program follows the Common Core Learning Standards and our teachers use the performance indicators in planning their instruction. Our program incorporates UDL and scaffolding strategies on all ESL levels. The classrooms have a wide range of print and visual materials to support increasing English Language Proficiency. Classrooms have leveled classroom libraries to support student literacy. Graphic novels will also be used as well as more abridged versions of literary works, educational DVDs, DOE ELL Video Library, translating dictionaries, other adapted texts specifically geared for the English Language learner, a curriculum focusing on the rhetorical strategies with an emphasis on paragraph and essay composition, as well as an emphasis on response to literature strategies in preparation for the Common Core English Regents. Also, teachers are provided with hands-on manipulatives that will enhance learning in the classroom, such as authentic and computer-based pictures, visuals, film adaptations of books, demonstrations, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information simplified rubrics, and this year we are incorporating more technology in the classroom via the use of a laptops, computer labs and Promethean boards. The emphasis is also on teaching good study skills, more cooperative learning activities, and more frequent use of visuals and real objects to enhance instruction. Also, teachers are provided with hands-on manipulatives that will enhance learning in the classroom, such as authentic and computer-based pictures, visuals, film adaptations of books, demonstrations, simplified rubrics, and this year we are incorporating more technology in the classroom via the use of a laptops, computer labs and Promethean boards. The emphasis is also on teaching good study skills, more cooperative learning activities, and more frequent use of visuals and real objects to enhance instruction. Materials are separate and distinct from from those used for daily instruction Please specify titles and publishers of main supplemental materials. Publisher: Cambridge University Press Cambridge University Press publishes a large variety of books and resource materials for teachers and English language learners at various ages and proficiency levels, including those focusing on language learning and applied linguistics, grammar, listening/speaking, academic reading and writing, TOEFL preparation, and business English. Texts appropriate for higher proficiency levels and learners with academic goals are in the majority. (Most titles listed here use standard North American English.) Possible Titles: ESL Series: Interchange Intro(beginning level), Interchange(Levels 1-3), New Interchange(Levels 1-3), Passages(Levels 1-2) Listening and Speaking: Let's Talk(intermediate level), Active Listening (Levels 1-3), Speaking Naturally Pronunciation:Pronunciation Pairs, Clear SpeechGrammar and Vocabulary: Basic Grammar in Use (Levels high beginning to low intermediate), Grammar in Use (intermediate level), Vocabulary in Use (intermediate level) Reading: Cambridge English Readers series (graded readers), Genuine Articles: Authentic Reading Texts for Intermediate Students of American English ESL and Teacher A plus program, differentiated materials that are NYSESLAT and Regents-based, use of technology such as Promethean boards, computers, use of software e.g. First Words for ESL designed to teach key English Vocabulary by Essential Skills company, Castle Learning Online,. Please indicate how records will be maintained, including student attendance and program notification in parents’ preferred languages. Attendance records will be maintained in the Assistant Principal's department office. Parent notifications will be translated into parents preferred language. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: 1. Rationale To keep abreast with the current teaching and learning effective practices, the teachers will continue to work on ESL presentations and methodologies in teaching ELL students. Professional Development focused on helping ESL teachers align instruction with common core standards to improve students’ reading and writing skills will be provided by the school during departmental meetings, and professional development days. ELL teachers will participate in other workshops facilitated by the Department of Education specifically CFN and the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support ( DELLSS.) 2. Teachers to receive training - All ESL and bilingual education teachers 3. Schedule and duration Every first Monday of the month - Staff meeting Every second Monday of each month, department meetings for instructional and support staff across subject areas are focused on different areas of language arts instruction to enhance learning for ELLs. Once a month - other providers Every Friday is professional development for 90 minutes in the school where all teachers involved in Title III are also participants. 4. Topics to be covered - Dates - Names of Providers 10/05/18 Student Engagement (Rendon & Smith) 10/12/18 Engagement through Questioning and Discussion (George and Smith) 10/19/18 Saving Time with Technology (Colon & Desai) 10/26/18 Using Assessment in Instruction (Wise) 11/2/18 Creating Optimal Environment for ELLs (Colon& George) 11/09/18 Empowering Students to take Ownership of Learning (Moharrem & Ayiehmohtsoh) 11/16/18 Creating an Optimal Environment for SWD (Garcia & Wise) 12/07/18 Using Media to Engage Parents (Nieves & Desai) 12/14/18 Tune into your Individual Student Needs (K Smith & Moharrem) 12/21/18 Real World Connections (Colon) 1/04/19 Questioning and Discussion Techniques (Rendon) 01/11/19Assessing Digital Student Work (Desai) 1/18/19 Purposeful Grouping (A.George) 01/25/19 Practical Tools for Enhancing Assessment (K. Smith & Desai) 2/01/19 Technology & the Common Core Standards (Desai) 2/08/19 Using Formative Assessments to Drive Instruction (A.George) 2/15/19 Turning Data into Action ( Colon) 03/01/19 Designing Summative Assessments (A.George) 03/8/19 Exciting Students about Writing ( (Zabski & Colon) 03/15/19 Effective Strategies for Engaging Students in Discussion (Aieymohstoh & K. Smith) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part C: Professional Development 03/22/19 Socratic Seminars ( A. George & F. Smith) 03/29/19 Embedding Higher Order Thinking Skills into Instruction (Rendon) 04/26/19 Effectively Integrating Technology into Rigorous & Meaningful Student Work Products (A.George) 05/03/19 Rigor Through Empowerment (A. George & N. Ayeimohtsoh) 05/10/19Using Rigor and Relevance to prepare students for college (A. George & N. George) 05/17/19 Common Core Modifications for SWD & ELL (Colon & Zabski) Program participation records (including agendas and attendance sheets) will be maintained in the Assistant Principal's department office. Our professional development will significantly impact the instruction students experience, leading teachers to spend more time on complex writing tasks such as connecting evidence to an argument as well as focused attention on writing conventions. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale PROGRESS High School recognizes the importance of keeping the parents of ELLs informed of academic issues and events affecting their children, including information about the college application process. Research indicates the following: • Effective programs that engage families embrace a philosophy of partnership between the teachers, parents, administrators, and school community as a whole. • Studies find that students with parents who are well informed about activities in school are more likely to: a. have parents who will be more involved in their children’s academic life b. earn higher grades and test scores, c. pass their classes, earn credits and be promoted, d. attend school regularly, e. have better social skills, show good behavior and adapt well to school, f. graduate and go on to further education 2. Schedule and Duration There will be four ELL Parent meetings- two in the Fall and two in the spring. The location of these meetings will be the school library. 3. Topics to be covered Topic 1- Computer and Internet Literacy Rationale- Parents are crucial stakeholders in teaching children safe and healthy use of internet. It can also help them in other practical ways. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Date- December 14, 2018 Time- 12:30 to 2:30 pm Name of Provider- Ms. Colon ESL Teacher Topic 2- Using the Skedula Account and Navigating ARIS Rationale- It allows parents to view important student and school information such as attendance records, assignments due dates and grades, graduation eligibility, school announcements and more. Date-Friday January 12, 2018 Time- 12:30 to 2:30 pm Provider-Ms. Colon ESL Teacher Topic 3- Navigating Application and Requirements for American Citizenship Rationale-Demystify the process Date-Friday, February 15, 2019 Time-12:30 to 2:30 pm Name of Provider- Ms. Colon ESL Teacher Topic 4 -Guide in the College Application Process Rationale- To help parents understand the process and make it more manageable Date - Friday, March 29, 2019 Time- 12:30 to 2:30 pm Name of Provider -Ms. Colon ESL Teacher 4. Name of Provider - ESL teachers with the assistance of parent coordinator 5. How the parents will be notified of these activities Parents will be notified using English and Spanish languages - * by mail * by backpacking letters *by using phonemaster autophone system Parent participation records (including agendas and attendance sheets) will be maintained in the Assistant Principal's department office. Parent invitations and program materials will be translated into parents preferred language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 260 hrs x $50.13 = $13,033 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teacher Per Session N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Educational Software N/A N/A $17,230 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $4,197 N/A N/A $17,230 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name PROGRESS High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 474 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. William Jusino Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marija Petkovic, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Rony Enriquez, Bil Soc. St. Teacher/Subject Area Aisha George/ ENG Related-Service Provider Nelson Roldan Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Alberto Garcia/ AP Supervision Coach type here School Counselor Jorge Arias/ AP Parent Christina Rivera Parent Coordinator Pamela Hicks Field Support Center Staff Member Bernadette Fitzgerald Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1017 Total number of ELLs 120 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.80% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. K 1 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1998-99 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 15 0 0 0 0 0 15 10 39 0 0 0 0 0 39 11 47 0 0 0 0 0 47 12 22 0 0 0 0 0 22 Tot # 123 0 0 0 0 0 123 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use a combination of strategies to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, including the LAB-R in English and Spanish LAB, the NYSESLAT, reading and writing surveys to determine what students' likes and dislikes are in terms of their literacy, and teacher made diagnostics. SIFE Identification Questionnaire, ATS reports on ELA and Math tests, RLAT/RMNR, REDS are also used. Generally, data indicate that ELLs are below grade level in reading and writing. This means that more rigorous instruction in these modalities be provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Bi - Weekly Calendar of Assessment development and review. Department daily co-planning scheduled throughout year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for ELLs is determined based on common assessments, state assessments, formative classroom assessments and conversations with students and parents, as well as teacher evaluations. Specifically in the AMAO, 59.13% showed progress from last year. Progress here means students moving up one level to the next, i.e beginning to intermediate or intermediate moving up to advanced. Out of those who made progress, 32% became proficient or tested out of ESL. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is reviewed by our ELL Inquiry Team to specifically prescribe academic interventions as needed, e.g. additional courses, tutoring, on-line support, after school/Saturday Academy,etc. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the NYSESLAT, the results revealed across proficiency levels are the following: Out of 127 NYSESLAT takers, 19% passed . Of those who didn't pass , 37 % scored in the expanding level, 19% scored in the transitioning, 26% in the emerging level and 18% scored in the entering level. Compared to the past 3 years, majority of the ELLs were in the intermediate level following the old procedure of identifying proficiency levels. With the revised test aligned to Common Core and folowing the new procedure of of proficiency level determination, the results showed that majority are on the expanding level, almost one fourth takers are emerging, one fifth are transitioning and only 18% are entering. These show that majority are on the higher proficiency level considering that the examination has changed. For the remaining ELLs, the beginners are spread differently -in 9th-28%, 10th 33% and 11th -22 %and 12 th -17%. The 12 th are mostly new ELLs coming from other countries. Majority of the low intermediates are in the 12th grade-46%, followed by 10th-31%, none in 11th and 9th-23%.For the transitioning level students, majoriity are 10 th graders which is 42%, with equal percentages in the 9 th and 12 th . For the advanced level students, 50% are 10 th , 28% are 9 th . 22% are 11th graders and none in the 12th grade.These numbers pose concerns in terms of curricular and instructional decisions to provide timely interventions to the beginners. During common planning conferences, these students need to be identified and individually addressed in order to move them forward. Speaking about the NYSITELL, most takers scored in the entering level. Analysis of NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data further indicate that our students need a lot more support in terms of reading comprehension and development of writing skills than they do in speaking and listening where many scored at the intermediate level. In fact, the NYSESLAT results reveal that the students show progress developing proficiency faster in listening and speaking than in reading and writing. The ENL team has discussed the continued alignment of instruction with the ELA common core curriculum with the inclusion of more reading and writing activities into the ENL classes, including more grammar-based instruction and vocabulary-building activities. The shorter term goals and intent is to help them build stamina and move those at the intermediate and advanced level ELLs from the adapted texts to the actual texts that will include richer vocabulary. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Assessments outcomes (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are disseminated at our weekly professional development sessions. Additional review and discussion will take place at department and faculty meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL PROGRAM INTEGRATED MODEL: ENL certified teacher: Ms. Zabski, Ms. Colon and Mr. Nieves (Servicing grades 9-12) INDIVIDUALLY CERTIFIED MODEL: Two individually certified teachers (co-teaching) Ms. George, Ms. Muir, and Mr. Adames (Servicing grades 9-12) For the ESL departmentalized programs, the students report to the scheduled ESL class(es) as indicated on their programs and as required by the CR Part 154 regulations; ie. beginners receive 540 minutes per week of ESL instruction; therefore, they are enrolled in 3 periods of ESL instruction per day. Intermediate level students receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction, therefore, they are enrolled in two ESL classes per day. The advanced level students receive180 minutes and are, therefore, enrolled in one ESL class and one ELA class per day. Beginners are placed in 3 classs periods of ESL, We also have 1 ESL class that is team taught as well as some across content areas. b. As to the program models, in the TBE and ESL classes, students are programmed heterogeneously and by literacy needs. They receive English language arts instruction in their ESL classes and NLA support is provided in the content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Transitional Bilingual Education program is for non-native English speaking students who have difficulty with written or spoken English. The program provides instruction with supports and transition into English the the New Language. The progam includes language arts and subject matter instruction in the students' native language and English as well as intensive instruction in English as a Second Language. As the student develops English proficiency using the strengthened knowledge and academic skills required in the native language, instruction in English increases and native language decreases. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The five proficiency levels for ELLs are: Entering-three units of study per week (540 minutes), Emerging-two units of study per week (360 minutes) , Transitioning-One unit of study per week (180 minutes), Expanding-One unit of study per week (180 minutes), and Commanding-continue to receive services for an additional two year in terms of testing accomodations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  For the ENL classes, the students are programmed as per the language provision of the CR Part 154, ie. Entering = 540 minutes of ESL, Emerging and Transitioning = 360 of ENL minutes, and Expanding= 180 of ENL+180 of ELA instruction and they receive a copy of their program. The teachers are also programmed accordingly, as discussed above in item #1. In the Transitional Bilingual Program, in the content area classrooms the beginner level students receive 40% instruction in English and are supported with 60% instruction in their native language, the intermediate level students receive 50% in English and 50% in Spanish, and the advanced level 75% in English and 25% native language support. The content-area teachers differentiate based on the students' levels of proficiency and needs while also implementing ESL strategies. We are in the process of creating native language arts classes in order to support the literacy needs of the ELLs; meanwhile, the content area classes are taught by teachers who are certified in the subject area and fluent in the Spanish language. There are also Spanish speaking paraprofessionals who provide additional native language support. Three of these teachers; two special education and one math, also possess their bilingual extention certificates; The other teachers are willing to work on the requirements needed for the bilingual extension certificate. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ESL teachers continue to engage in collaborative activities and they also share best practices with content area teachers. The ESL as well as the content area teachers read, gather, and share instructional materials, and provide common assessments, analyze the results, and consider and implement ‘next steps’ that can help them meet the needs of all students. Also, more elements of technology are expected in both the ESL and the content area classrooms. The Assistant Principal of ESL has made all teachers involved with the ELLs more aware of the educational challenges the ELLs face across content areas and provides them with instructional support and ideas on differentiation of instruction aligned with the new Core Standards and all focusing on literacy. Academic intervention is provided with individualized remedial instruction during Lunch and Learn and after school beginning in November for students who need extra support like the SIFE, Long Term ELLs, newcomers, and those alternatively placed in special education. For students reaching proficiency, they will be gradually placed in mainstream classes. In addition to implementation of these strategies, in the bilingual classes, instruction of the content areas is provided in English and Spanish. For Social Studies, students with little fluency are taught the Social Studies curriculum in both their native language (Spanish) and English with an emphasis on the English Language. The H1curriculum covers prehistory until Medieval Europe. In this course the students will complete a series of writing assignments that aim on improving their English proficiency. Students are assessed frequently to document their progress and this data is used to drive instruction. This class is a co-teacher model where the history and ESL teacher co-teach. The "Do now" is a grammar related activity and is usually lead by the ESL teacher. The mini lesson is a history concept, event, or person, this is usually lead by the social studies teacher as the ESL teacher conferences with students. The daily group work is targeted to practice reading and writing skills. Students are grouped according to their proficiency and work on a series of task which improve their English proficiency. The ESL teacher and Social Studies teacher circulate the classroom to assess student speaking and listening skills. Pictures, tables, maps, diagrams, globes and other visual aids are provided to assist in the comprehension of concepts. For Science and Math, both languages are used. Instruction is aligned with common core and different domains in Danielson framework for teaching. ELLs first learn a concept in Spanish and are then taught the academic English vocabulary that goes with that concept. In all bilingual content areas the following are used - content-area glossaries, visuals, flexible homogeneous grouping, differentiation of questioning and prompting within heterogeneous grouping, word walls, and audio-visuals are projected through the Promethean board. In addition, the Universal Design for Learning is embedded in instruction. Methods that are used to support students include QTEL strategies. American Institiue of Research Strategies and Materials are also integrated. QTEL strategies include utilization of jigsaw activities, collaborative student activiities with teacher support, scaffolding, and chunking of texts. Audiovisual support is also implemented. Teachers provide content area support by providing professional development to STEM and Humanities teachers on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  implementing effective strategies for teaching Ells. In addition, there are common planning sessions that ESL teachers participate in with contrent area teachers to share best practices and address ELL specific concerns. Walkthroughs are also held for both ELL and content teachers as participants to observe and subsequently implemement targeted strategies presented through the PD program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? TBE content area teachers are providing teacher made diagnostic assessments in their home language. The content of the formative assessment adheres to the common core standards. The test results are aggregated and analyzed. Trends are established by an inquiry team and interventions are put in place to address concerns. For formative tests used in the student's native language, common assessments are being utilized in three cycles throughout the year in all academic disciplines. Summative/ In additon to the common assessments, we also administer the state mandated exams such as the ELE Spanish Reading exam is administered every spring time annually. In addition, ELLs are also evaluated periodically through teacher generated language assessments and online exams such as from Castle Learning. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status As stated above, in order to meet the linguistic needs of our students we will continue to follow parental choice and the CR part 154 mandates, as well as the PROGRESS High School language allocation policy in terms of content subject area instruction, which states the following: • For Entering students 60% of instruction is conducted in their native language and 40% is conducted in English • For Emerging and transitioning students, the percentage shifts to 50% native language, 50% English • For expanding students, 25% instruction in the native language and 75% in English Entering level receives 3 periods of ESL instruction a day,Emerging and Transitioning -2 periods, and Expanding- 1 period EL and 1 period language elective. As our English Language Learners are transitioned, they are introduced to highly contextualized student tasks that encourage thinking, reading, speaking, and writinfollowing the common core standards. Sample scaffolded units published by the Department of ELLs are utilized. The specific instructional strategies include read-alouds, listening activities, typed final drafts, speaking tasks that establish discussion of routines, shared reading, intensive guided reading, independent reading, phonics, language mechanics taught in context, shared writing, modeled writing, independent writing and reading and using rubrics and writing checklists to self-monitor and self-correct their work. Teachers employ scaffolding activities to provide support, such as differentiated instruction, grouping, peer tutoring, modeling, questioning, and the use of graphic organizers, as well as authentic-based learning in the ESL classrooms such as the use of projects via the writing process. Instruction is augmented with classroom libraries, the Internet, including the use of the media center in the library, and we are using technology more frequently as an instructional tool in each ESL classroom (ie. use of lap top and projectors) in order to enhance instruction and the literacy skills of our ELLs. There will also be an emphasis on typing final drafts (for intermediate and advanced level students), adaptation of books and stories read, as well as books on CD, among others. We differentiate instruction in a variety of ways to support our ELLs. a. For our SIFE students we stress explicit instruction in reading across the subject areas with an emphasis on vocabulary-building. This is done in the ESL classrooms as well as across the content areas if they don't practice reading daily. This is done with daily vocabulary instruction related to the lessons and reading comprehension and paragraph and essay composition strategies via the writing process. Academic intervention is also in place with individualized remedial instruction during Lunch and Learn. Students receive supplemental services in our After School ESL Program to better prepare them for the NYSESLAT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  as well as the English Regents. b. For the ENL newcomers we have a Bridge credit-bearing program that takes place during the summer for our incoming 9th graders that includes our ELLs, including our SIFE students. In the program students received a host of instructional and culturally-related services via the support from our Leadership Program. Throughout the school year, literacy instruction is emphasized across ESL classes, especially, in regards to the SIFE students and teachers differentiate their lesson plans to include content that will help newcomers better adjust to life in their new school as well as lessons geared towards learning more about the United States culture. Also, more reading and writing is infused in the content area classes and the bilingual teachers are including more instruction on grammar, discourse, phonemic, phonological, and semantic awareness. c. With those ELLs in ESL service for 4-6 years, most of which fall at the intermediate level of English proficiency, ESL and content area teachers teach word knowledge, they model and teach basic reading skills for fluency, comprehension of classroom texts, grammatical and writing skills lessons¸and this year we are putting more emphasis on students reading aloud with peers and discussing and formulating their questions using better phonemic awareness and pronunciation skills. d. Our plan for the Long Term English Language Learners (LTELLs) includes the strategies listed above. We have applied for a SIFE/LTELLs Intervention Academic Grant using the ExC-ELL/RIGOR. Our target group is of students that are LTELLs and also SIFE. Tier 1 will entail professional development workshops facitated by the RIGOR program educators geared to ESL teachers, but also to the mainstream teachers on how to integrate language and literacy development along with subject matter instruction. Tier 2 will focus on reading instruction in science and social studies. The lessons in the program are leveled. Also, CDs are provided and it includes pre and post assessments in English and Spanish in order to determine progress. Mandated services for former ELLS up to two years after exiting ELL status as per CR Part 154.2 are a half unit of study of integrated ENL/ESL and ELA, Math, Science, or Social Studies and/or OBEFLS approval, other service sthat mmonitor and support each former ELLs language development and academic progress. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to meet the academic needs of our ELL-SWD within the least restrictive environment, our school has implemented a comprehensive curriculum that serves this population. Students are scheduled in ESL courses according to their current learning needs. Other programs, such as Wilson Just Words, have been implemented to serve ELL-SWD that are low readers, and that have not acquired the necessary decoding skills at this point in their academic years. Also, the curriculum is differentiated according to their strengths and their multiple learning modalities, so that the student has more opportunities. ELLs/SWD are provided with scaffolded strategies infusing UDL principles to teach academic language and higher order thinking skills as required by common core standards. Technological supports are also implemented such as audio visual components, modified student consumables as well as online differentiated supports (i.e. Castle Learning and iLearn). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We look over a variety of different sources of data to determine which ELLs need the most support in different content areas, including in English and math. With assistance from the other department assistant principals, we specifically target those that have not passed their regents courses and/or struggling in their current courses and provide them with a host of interventions, including but not limited to, review classes during the school day, lunch and learn one-on-one tutoring, after school support and credit-recovery programs, and the planned Saturday Academy tutoring program. Fo instructional scheduling, during beginning of the school year, ESL and Special Eds are programmed first for ESL instruction to make sure they receive mandated minutes and accomodotions in their IEPs, then they're programmed for other classes. To maximize time spent with non-disabled peers, their program is blended between least restrictive and non-restrictive based on IEP recommendations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We look over a variety of different sources of data to determine which ELLs need the most support in different content areas, including in English and math. With assistance from the other department assistant principals, we specifically target those that have not passed their regents courses and/or struggling in their current courses and provide them with a host of interventions, including but not limited to, review classes during the school day, lunch and learn one-on-one tutoring, after school support and credit-recovery programs for ESL, ELA Regents review four times a week, Math and Social Studies to be done twice a week, and the planned Saturday Academy tutoring program for Math and Science. For beginners, native language will be used to support instruction. In addition,native language intervention programs are implemented such as Title III programs offered after school and Saturdays for students who need support in content area subjects taught by bilingual teachers. These students are targeted based on data gathered from Regents results exams, quarterly progress reports, and administartion of mid year regents exams and midterms. These intervention services are also based on data gathered from ATS reports (RLER) stating longterm ELLs and SIFEs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As stated above, we have written the SIFE/LTELLs Academic Intervention Grant to better support our ELLs across subject areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered access to all school programs, including but not limited to, the National Honor Society, clubs under the Leadership Program, Lunch and Learn, our ESL After School Program, and the planned Saturday Academy tutoring, etc. Ther have been reinvigorated efforts to actively engage all students, strategic outreach and activities are being developed and implemented so that students feel connected and invested in their school community. The newly organized student council has recruited ESL and Bilingual teachers as facilitators of events for increased ELL participation. Marketing and advertisements are in both English and Native languages. Room to room campaigning and posters are specific to student interest and teacher involvement has increased to include all subgroups. Groups and programs also include student initiatives, an experiential learning afterschool program ("Off The Block", an array of PSAL sports activities, band and chorus, BuildOn volunteer organization as well as representation in Advanced Placement classes. In addition, graduation activities also reflect ELL participation (ex. student speeches in English and native language). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers are provided with a host of materials to support ESL and transitional bilingual education instruction, abridged versions of the classics, other adapted texts specifically geared for the English Language learner, a curriculum focusing on the rhetorical strategies with an emphasis on paragraph and essay composition, as well as an emphasis on response to literature strategies in preparation for the English Regents. Also, teachers are provided with hands-on manipulatives that will enhance learning in the classroom, such as authentic and computer-based pictures, visuals, film adaptations of books, demonstrations, simplified rubrics, and this year we are incorporating more technology in the classroom via the use of a laptop and projector. The emphasis is also on teaching good study skills, more cooperative learning activities, and more frequent use of visuals and real objects to enhance instruction. For Social Studies, Math, and Science the curriculum is aligned to Common Core and Danielson framework. There are different class sets for Content Area subjects in English and Spanish likeHistoria del Mundo by Ellis Esler and published by Prentice Hall, Biologia published by Prentice hall, Earth Science and Chemistry (Spanish sets), NY Integrated Algebra in English and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Spanish. For Native Language Arts, there's Realidades levels 1,2,3 published by Prentice Hall. There are also library books in English and Spanish, NYSESLAT Practice materials, bilingual glossaries. This is supplemented by promethean boards, mobile labs, mac lab, and library media center. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Transitional Bilingual Program model, we provide instruction in the content area classes in English and in Spanish as stated under the heading in this document titled 'Programming and Scheduling Information' as follows:For beginning level students, 60% of instruction is conducted in their native language and 40% in English. Materials include handouts, consumable examinations, dual language dictionaries and glossaries, content area glossaries, audiovisual presentations (Powerpoint/Promethean Board/ActivInspire) in dual languages. For intermediate level students, 60% of instruction is conducted in their native language and 50% in English. For advanced level students, 25% of instruction is conducted in their native language and 75% in English. Research indicates that students who become proficient in all four modalities successfully carry over the skills and concepts into their English-based classes. We understand and nurture the need for Native Language supports. If students learn to read well in their native language, they can then transfer these skills to English and, in turn, will develop stronger literacy skills. English acquisition is our gola here at PROGRESS High School. In the ESL classes we provide a host of supports as stated in this section of the LAP. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We understand the challenges ELLs face, including in their content area classrooms, and we provide the supports in the form of instruction, books, materials, technology, and tutoring that are both age and level appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teachers are provided with a host of materials to support ESL and transitional bilingual education instruction, abridged versions of the classics, other adapted texts specifically geared for the English Language learner, a curriculum focusing on the rhetorical strategies with an emphasis on paragraph and essay composition, as well as an emphasis on response to literature strategies in preparation for the English Regents. Also, teachers are provided with hands-on manipulatives that will enhance learning in the classroom, such as authentic and computer-based pictures, visuals, film adaptations of books, demonstrations, simplified rubrics, and this year we are incorporating more technology in the classroom via the use of a laptop and projector. The emphasis is also on teaching good study skills, more cooperative learning activities, and more frequent use of visuals and real objects to enhance instruction. For Social Studies, Math, and Science the curriculum is aligned to Common Core and Danielson framework. There are different class sets for Content Area subjects in English and Spanish likeHistoria del Mundo by Ellis Esler and published by Prentice Hall, Biologia published by Prentice hall, Earth Science and Chemistry (Spanish sets), NY Integrated Algebra in English and Spanish. For Native Language Arts, there's Realidades levels 1,2,3 published by Prentice Hall. There are also library books in English and Spanish, NYSESLAT Practice materials, bilingual glossaries. This is supplemented by promethean boards, mobile labs, mac lab, and library media center. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As stated in this section, we have a Bridge program that is implemented prior to the beginning of the school year. It includes a host of instructional and cultural activities for our incoming students, including our ELLs newcomers. Also, in our ESL classes, we continually emphasize a curriculum that is cutlurally-based in order to help our newcomers develop a cultural foundation that will help them to better adjust to their new academic and social environment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our Ethnic Drama and Film, College and Careers, Latino Studies, African-American Studies, and Foreign Language language-based classes are open to ELLs, too of course. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ESL teachers participate in the school's established professional development program with specific sessions focused on the ELL subgroup. Our Professional Development Plan aims to use research based instructional techniques to support and improve student learning and help our students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional development will take place through school-wide professional development, department professional development, mentoring and department meetings. The themes of student engagement through discussions, rigor and literacy will be interwoven through all facets of professional development. These focus areas will allow faculty to improve student learning by increasing teacher effectiveness. In addition to these focal points teachers will also engage in developmental opportunities based on Danielson’s Framework and the Common Core Learning Standards. Using available data, information from instructional rounds and observations a strategic professional development plan will address the Citywide Instructional Expectations and the Instructional Shifts as they relate to individual disciplines. External resources such as Network Institutes and internal resources such as teacher expertise will be used to provide differentiated professional development opportunities. Using our modified school schedule teachers will meet twice a month for a three hour block of time to attend professional development sessions intended to; strengthen teacher competency in elements of the Framework for Teaching, deepen teacher understanding and knowledge of the Common Core Learning Standards and assume best practices for implementation. School Monthly Professional Development Focus will be established by administrators to provide teachers with professional development based on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. The monthly focus will be evident in common planning, monthly assessments, professional walk-though, grade team meetings and inter-visitations. The cabinet will review and revise the professional development plan on a monthly basis to assess progress and make any changes necessary based on data collected. School wide Professional Development : School Wide Professional Development will take place on the first Friday of each month. These professional development sessions will focus on building upon best practices and addressing school weaknesses. These weaknesses are identified by using available data and information collected through observations and instructional rounds. With guidance from their administrators teachers will select the professional development sessions they would like to attend on a monthly basis. Each teacher is required to attend two 1.5 hour sessions on the first Friday of every month. Teachers will sign up for these sessions electronically and are expected to keep records of professional development sessions attended. These sessions address the established monthly focus of the domains, components and elements of the Framework for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Teaching. ENL and Bilingual teachers actuively participate in the above mentioned established Professional Development program. Sessions include but are not limited to: Department specific Professional Development-Department Professional Development will target the implementation of literacy in the different disciplines. School-wide Monthly Focus Based On Danielson’s Framework October 3b- Questioning and Discussion Techniques 3c-Engaging Students in Learning November 2a- Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport 2b- Establishing a Culture for Learning 2e- Organizing Physical Space December 2c- Managing Classroom Procedures 2d-Managing Student Behavior January 1d-Demonstrating Knowledge of Resources 1e-Designing Coherent Instruction February 3a-Communicating with Students 1b- Demonstrating Knowledge of Students 4c- Communicating with Parents March 1f- Designing Student Assessment 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction April 3e-Demonstrating Flexibility and Responsiveness 4d- Participating in the Professional Community May 4e-Growing and Developing Professionally 4d- Participating in the Professional Community 4f-Demonstrating Professionalism June 4b- Maintaining Accurate Records 4a-Reflecting on teaching 1a-Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy The following are the topics inlcuded but are not limited to in Schoolwide and Department PDs: October - Department o Lesson Alignment to Common Core Learning Standards o Implementation of Instructional Shifts o Guidelines for Standardized Exams o A Study of the Framework for Teaching November o SESIS o Classroom Environment o Universal Design for Learning (UDL) o Fostering Student Discussion o Comprehensive Study of the Framework for Teaching o Use of Collaborative Teaching Practice o Analyzing Student Work o Multiple Points of Entry December 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  o Classroom Management o Lesson Planning o Responding to Student Behavior o GoogleDocs training o Close Reading o Curriculum and the Common Core o Interdisciplinary Connections o Creating Assessments to Bridge the Gap in Student Achievement January o Using SKEDULA as a resource o Lesson Planning and Unit Development o Effective Instructional Groups o Creating Common Core Aligned Learning Activities o Creating Common Core Aligned Tasks o Using Depth of Knowledge in Unit Maps and Individual Lessons o Effective Co teaching Models o Effective Use of Student Work to Inform Instruction February o Communicating with Students – Conferencing and Student Work o Engaging Parents in Instructional Activities- (Parent Coordinator) o Differentiated Lesson March o Creating Common Core Aligned Tasks o Analyzing Student Work o Using Formative Assessments o Socratic Seminar o Using Student Work to Identify Key Instructional Practices o Using Short, Focused Research Projects o Identifying Authentic Opportunities for Reading and Writing o Promoting Effective Classroom Discussiono Addressing Black and Latino Male Dropout Rate April o Checking for Understanding o Team Building o Multiple Points of Entry o Using Art in all Disciplines May o Enhancing Content Knowledge o Compliance in Special Education and ESL o Professional Inquiry o Addressing Black and Latino Male Dropout Rate o Using Data for Curriculum Revisions o Increasing Rigor o Provide Access for Diverse Learners Using UDL Principles o Efficient and Effective Common Planning Practice June o Implementation of the 2017-2018 Citywide Instructional Expectations o 2017-2018 Instructional Focus 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  o Establishing 2017-2018 Inquiry team Target Population and Students o Reflecting on teaching to Inform Curriculum Revisions 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff members are provided with a list of the ELLs, including those that have gained proficiency in recent years, and are made aware of the different challenges these students face even after passing the NYSESLAT. The goal is to have all stakeholders aware so that they are better equipped to serve this population for smooth transitioning to high school. The school has a Freshman House run by an Assistant Principal who focuses on their instruction, attendance and positive behavior. Guidance Counselors also support by providing workshops on graduation requirements, credit accumulation, and college readiness. Every Friday, there is a Freshmen Academy with a program "Organized for Life" for 3 periods facilitated by the Leadership team. In addition, teachers and guidance counselors are supported by Attendance Improvement Dropout Prevention (AIDP) known as Graduate, Prepare, Succeed-New York City (GPS-NYC)which focuses on 9th grade students and provides academic support, attendance outreach, counseling and family engagement As described in the response above, the school has a very comprehensive professional development plan. Every Friday for 3 periods, all teachers schoolwide (including of course the ESL, bilingual, and special education teachers)go through rigorous PDs the topics of which are detailed in number 2. There will be 30 Fridays. The professional development coordinator maintains all attendance records and artifacts from pd sessions on GoogleDocs for teachers to access as needed. Attendance logs are maintained by the APO and professional development coordinator. ENL and Bilingual teachers are participants in the weekly instructional walkthroughs which focus on the schoolwide professional development goals from the previous week. Teachers will have an opportunity to participate in the instructional walkthrough throughout the course of the academic year focusing on different competencies. A group of five teachers will be able to observe implementation of the skills gained from the school wide professional development. After the walkthrough, teachers will have the opportunity to discuss best practices in the classroom that were visited. Teachers will also be acknowledged for their best practices through our weekly newsletter and in the next schoolwide professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ESL teachers, the assistant principal of Guidance, and the parent coordinator reach out to the parents of ELLs in various ways, including via phone calls, one-on-conferences, invitations to PTA meetings, access to Snapgrade/Jupiter account, letters sent home notifying them of upcoming events in school and in the NYC surrounding areas -- all geared to the immigrant population. There is a once a month PTA meetings conducted by the parent coordinator. On translation services, oral translation services will be provided by school staff and parent volunteers. When needed, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be used to provide translation for languages that cannot be translated at schoolaste response to question here: Speaking of translation services, PROGRESS will survey and identify staff that are fluent in languages other than English. These teachers will be asked if they could make themselves available for any translations needed during the school day. • We will contact the Office of English Language Learners and request their translation materials. • School personnel will provide written translation services. • Parent Coordinator will provide written translation and request translation material from the Office of ELLs. The school has provided parents that speak a language other than English with a translated Bill of Parents Rights and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Responsibilities. We have appropriate school signage and forms in both English and Spanish. The school will provide parents whose primary language is not English or Spanish with written notification of their rights regarding translations and interpretation services. We will post, near the school’s main entrance, notification of the office and room where a copy of written notification of parental rights regarding translation and interpretations can be found. The sign will be written in all applicable languages. The school’s safety plan will include procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance will be able to communicate with administrative offices. Parents will also be notified of the Departmental website they can go to learn of their translation and interpretation rights and services. PROGRESS will mail home surveys to identify the need of different languages. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PLEASE NOTE THE ANSWER TO QUESTION #2 IS HERE: Individual ESL teachers maintain records of parental involvement for each class taught. Parental contact is documented on SKEDULA. Parent meetings/conferences are recorded by teachers and a copy of sign in sheets are maintained by AP/Guidance. PLEASE NOTE THE ANSWER TO QUESTION #3 IN HERE: The parent coordinator has a big role in this area because she provides varied parent services such as the translation needs of families, helps parents obtain log-in information SKEDULA, provides information about graduation requirements, Regents exams, college admissions and financial aid, ensures all material translated into the languages appropriate for your parent community,and provides to the parents information to different citywide government and privately sponsored initiatives. Examples of parent inofrmation provided may include but is not limited to: a. New York Immigration Coalition's Parent Guide to College,“Your Children Can Go to College…Yes They Can b. Essential Allies Challenge- a competition to inspire New York City iZone schools to generate innovative ideas in supporting our students through family and parent engagement c. NYC Parent Academy-a collaborative effort with Long Island University to enhance partnerships within school communities to support student achievement by strengthening parent involvement d. NYC College Line launches online- a free, online community--available at NYCCollegeLine.org--NYC College Line for NYC-college-related questions e. Free Education Classes for Parents- The Office of Adult of Continuing Education (OACE f. Finish Your GED in 2016 Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: None at this time. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Jusino, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Progress High School School DBN: 14K474 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) William Jusino Title Principal Alberto Garcia Assistant Principal Pamela Hicks Parent Coordinator Aylin Zabski ENL/Bilingual Teacher Christina Rivera Parent Aisha George Teacher/Subject Area Rony Enriquez Teacher/Subject Area Jorge Arias Karen Watts Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K474 School Name: PROGRESS HIGH SCHOOL Superintendent: MS. KAREN WATTS The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. • After completing and analyzing data from the Bilingual Education Student Information Survey (BESIS), as well as providing our parents with a needs assessment, we concluded that we had a great need for translated documents in Spanish. The information gathered is recorded on ATS.Emergency cards and HLIS are kept in the students' cumulative folders. The parent coordinator will provide a needs assessment survey which will include the languages they speak, and whether or not they require written translation and oral interpretation. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  She will keep a copy of the survey results including the number of parents who responded, will communicate them to the administrators, and will develop a plan of action to meet their needs. The parent coordinator has determined that the following langauges are spoken by parent: English (grades 9-12), Spanish (grades 9-12), Haitian Creole (grades 9 and 10), and Arabic (grade 12). There is an excel spreadsheet that will be generated through ATS that will be updated regularly. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language a. Parents and students were informally surveyed and the parent coordinator determined that the following langauges are spoken by parents: English (grades 9-12), Spanish grades 9-12), Haitian Creole (grades 9 and 10), and Arabic (grade 12). There is an excel spreadsheet that will be generated through ATS that will be updated regularly. Based on our own school data we have a large number of students with Spanish as their home language. We reported the findings to our school leadership team and PTA Executive Board. They agreed that it is vital that our parents are communicated with in their native language. We informed the school community via memos and at PTA meetings. We hire bilingual support staff to help with the verbal and written communication. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PROGRESS HIGH SCHOOL disseminates all documents to parents including but not limited to attendance lettes, cut letters, student news letters, letters from the school leadership, afterschool program invitations, PTA and SLT calendar.Monthly schedules include a system that include Week 1-phone calls, Week 2-letters sent home, Week 3- meetings /PTA, Week 4-invitation follow up 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night September 30 th , 2015 Parent teacher conference nights, day-to-day attendance meetings with parents. PTA Meeting: 09/17/15; 10/15/15, 11/19/2015, 12/10/15, 01/21/16, 02/11/16, 03/10/16, 04/14/16, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91  05/12/16, 05/26/16 6/9/2016 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent coordinator will faciliatate a mass mailing notifying parents of the language that they prefer to receive correspondence, translation, and interpreation services (if applicable) from the school. The parent will be requested to reply with their preferences to update the prefereerd language document organized by student grade. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school has provided parents that speak a language other than English with a translated Bill of Parents Rights and Responsibilities. We have appropriate school signage and forms in both English and Spanish. The school will provide parents whose primary language is not English or Spanish with written notification of their rights regarding translations and interpretation services. We will post, near the school’s main entrance, notification of the office and room where a copy of written notification of parental rights regarding translation and interpretations can be found. The sign will be written in all applicable languages. The school’s safety plan will include procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance will be able to communicate with administrative offices. Parents will also be notified of the Departmental website they can go to learn of their translation and interpretation rights and services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 92  The parent coordinator will facilitate a PTA meeting with a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in PROGRESS High School to gather feedback and best practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 93 
