2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K488 School Name: BROOKLYN PREPARATORY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: NOAH LANSNER 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): K488 Brooklyn Preparatory High School 331300011488 09,10,11,12,SE 257 North 6 Street Brooklyn, NY 11211 718-486-2550 Phone Number: 718-486-2505 Fax: Noah Lansner nlansner@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Noah Lansner Jesse Adelson ShevaMillington Noah Lansner Eric Smith MacaiahMillington Kirsten Sampson N/A District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St btizge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Noah Lansner JP King ShevaMillington MacaiahMillington Kirsten Sampson KatelynColeman EricSmith Elizabeth Jordan *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/AP Member/PARENT Member/PARENT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Antoinette Simpson Melissa Peters Tonya Wilson Member/PARENT Member/Teacher Member/PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Brooklyn Prep is a small college-going high school where academic rigor and excellence is expected; a community where every student is known well; and a learning organization where both young people and adults are actively engaged in inquiry, reflection, and collaboration. Our responsibility is to develop in all students Habits of Mind, Work, and Heart needed to succeed in a challenging college program and fulfilling career. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Advisory: In order to support students to achieve high expectations, each teacher has a group of about 15 students fostering relationships that contribute to an academic community. Our advisories are multi-grade, which gives younger students a chance to be mentored and supported with our positive school culture by the older students. Brooklyn Prep’s advisory program consists of three strands: 1) Academic Skills-Includes progress report and report card discussions, goal setting and transcript reviews. 2) College Knowledge-Includes interest surveys, college and career research and trips to colleges. 3) Socio-Emotional Growth-Includes team-building, conflict resolution skills, and health studies. Portfolio: Every student has a Portfolio session after each semester, both in January and June. Students write academic reflections on their growth, they write reflections on social-emotional growth, create a resume and a college essay. There is a discussion among their peers and visitors about their Portfolio Presentation and their growth as a student and a person. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has approximately 20% students with IEPs, who have a variety of needs. We have about 2% ELL students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Every decision, whether it is budgetary, staffing or instructional is made with student achievement and doing what is best for the student experience in mind. Every decision is created by asking, what is best for the students? (Student Achievement/Effective School Leadership) All of our CEP goals are aligned with the components of the Framework. One of our CEP goals is to create a culture of student leadership, in which every student has another student whom he/she can go to for support (Supportive Environment). Another goal is--now that we have a coherence around what rigorous instruction looks like and how to plan for it--to consistently see rigorous instruction in every subject (Rigorous Instruction). Our programming structure creates time and space for teachers who teach together to collaborate during the day as well as after school (Collaborative Teachers). Lastly, one of our CEP goals is to create events inside and outside of school that create a school culture that students, parents and teachers want to be a part of (Family-Community Ties/Trust). 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K488 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 512 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 4 16 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 6 School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 79.3% % Reduced Lunch 2.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 49.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.13 3% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 94% 82% 89.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 120 108 84.1% 8.2% 17.2% 44.5% 1.8% 2.0% 6 26% 8.1 N/A N/A 87% 85% 87.2% 15% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Most recent Quality Review Findings: The school has aligned the Common Core Learning Standards to their Habits of Mind Learning Objectives Framework. Curricula and lesson plans provide multiple entry points for a variety of learners. Teachers choose key Habits of Mind objectives to emphasize during each lesson, unit, and semester creating cohesive unit plans using a customized unit plan template resulting in all students being provided learning experiences that are rigorous and engaging. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Assessment/Differentiation: At least 80% of students in each class can describe what they know and what their next steps are according to a defined document (e.g. TEAR or Algebra standards), and teachers will use differentiation indicators to help students reach those next steps. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers work in Critical Friends pairs to plan and implement differentiated instruction, develop routines for students to take ownership of their own knowledge and understanding, and look at student work to identify gaps, and target instruction to those gaps. All Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration/Lead Teachers Teachers will lead PD sessions approximately bi-weekly in how they implement rigorous instruction, differentiate tasks, track data, and plan inquiry units. All Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers will lead and collaborate in PD Sessions weekly on "Being a good advisor": Going over advisory lessons, practicing circles, trauma trainings, supporting advisees academically and making parent contact. All Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration/Lead Teachers Administration/Lead Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We send out parent newsletters with information on main events and how to support their children with what they are learning. They also receive email blasts about curriculum and school events. We still feature PupilPath as the main way for parents to log on or use the app to track attendance, grades and assignments that are due. Lastly, advisors reach out to parents at least 1-2 times monthly to continue that communication in addition to content teachers reaching out to parents weekly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Schedule allows for Critical Friends groups to meet twice per week as part of their professional periods ● Professional Development time on Mondays allows for teachers to lead PD for each other. ● Teacher programs are designed to maximize co-teaching relationships Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 13  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● All observations will include an assessment of how much students are aware of their own progress and next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school has achieved a 90% graduation rate for two consecutive years. This is due in large part to our supportive environment. We need to continue to improve the degree of support and trust students feel in order to continue improving our graduation rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Any student who is struggling academically or behaviorally will get rapid response outreach (within 1 week maximum) from both their advisor and their guidance counselor 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Mixed-grade advisories will allow teachers to build stronger relationships with students over a four-year period, and respond to challenges more quickly. All students September 2018 to June 2019 Guidance Counselors and Administration Grade team meetings will take place every Tuesday after school to ensure that all students who are struggling are identified quickly and communicated to guidance counselors and advisors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Guidance Counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Increased use of Kinvolved to communicate with parents quickly and reliably Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Dedicated guidance counselors on each grade. All teachers teach advisory Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every week at grade team meetings, progress monitoring will occur. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student progress towards credit accumulation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Most recent Quality Review Findings: The school has aligned the Common Core Learning Standards to their Habits of Mind Learning Objectives Framework. Curricula and lesson plans provide multiple entry points for a variety of learners. Teachers choose key Habits of Mind objectives to emphasize during each lesson, unit, and semester creating cohesive unit plans using a customized unit plan template resulting in all students being provided learning experiences that are rigorous and engaging. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Each teacher will teach at least one inquiry-based unit each semester, and those projects will include daily differentiation indicators to help students complete the inquiry project. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Yearlong in PD Administration & grade team leaders All students Yearlong in PD Administration and grade team leaders · Conduct Professional Development on inquiry-based instruction, students developing their own questions, and instilling a growth mindset in students and staff · Conduct Professional Development on “Tiered Tasks” to support ELLs, SWDs, struggling and advanced student learning needs · Collaborate in weekly professional development sessions to conduct “Student Work Study” and protocol to ensure and improve the effectiveness of lesson and unit planning Develop criteria for inquiry based units and performance tasks Performance tasks will include targeted scaffolds and enrichments to support and extent the learning of SWDs and ELLs, as well as high achieving students o Discussions and formative tasks that engage students in critical thinking and evidence based discourse 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All BPHS Curriculum will be available online for parents to view. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 19  · Teacher Grade Teams · Teacher Department Teams · Academic Review Committee Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. · Unit Plans and Curriculum maps will be submitted and reviewed by the Accreditation Committee on an ongoing basis. Instructional teachers reflect on committees feedback and submit revisions · Student work study protocols conducted by grade teams and department teams monthlyto demonstrate reflection and growth Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. BPHS Curriculum website Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have grown the number of student leadership programs each year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Each student can point to a student leader that has supported them academically or socially/emotionally in the last year. (PALs, Mentors, Student Council, TA, Learning Leader, Peer Mediators). 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Yearlong All teachers Mixed-grade advisories will allow teachers to build stronger relationships with students over a four-year period, and respond to challenges more quickly Student leadership programs (PALs, Mentors, Student Council, TA, Learning Leader, Peer Mediators). will be led by guidance counselors, Restorative Justice Counselor, and other school leaders Yearlong Over 200 students will participate Guidance Counselors, Restorative Justice Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent newsletters with student leadership opportunities and celebration are mailed out. PTA meetings will include celebrations and awards for student leaders. Our Dean of Student Services sends out weekly letters of opportunities to all students and their parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teachers will teach an advisory. Guidance Counselors and RJCs will teach classes aligned to student leadership. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 22  Periodic student surveys to measure how many students are involved in leadership, and how each student is impacted by a BPHS student leader. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Periodic student surveys to measure how many students are involved in leadership, and how each student is impacted by a BPHS student leader. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have steadily increased our graduation rate and college readiness. Parents are deeply involved in this work, and our college counselor meets regularly with individual parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Each month will have at least three different types of BPHS community building activities that target different groups of students and/or families. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? College Culture Committee will meet at least biweekly to plan school events. All students Yearlong Our Director of Student Services will plan events and connect students and families with opportunities outside of the school. All students Yearlong College Culture Committee Director of Student Services 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. College Counselor : We continue to work with our full-time CBI college counselor. We will be utilizing our additional parent-teacher conferences as focused on college readiness. Director of Student Services: We continue to work with our full-time director of student services, a comp time teacher position. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Number of students and parents who sign in at events. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Number of students and parents who sign in at events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Special Education Students ● ELL Students ● Level 1 and 2 scores on 8 th grade ELA test and/or NYS ELA Regents ● Student data ● Special Education Students ● ELL Students ● Level 1 and 2 scores on 8 th grade Math test and/or NYS Math Regents ● Student data ● Special Education Students ● ELL Students ● Student data Social Studies ● Special Education Students Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● All 9th grade ● Whole Class ● Small Group Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Extra 5 periods of ELA instruction Reading Program ● CTT classes provide extra support to with a second teacher in the room ● Tutoring ● Extra 5 periods of Math instruction ● All 9th grade ● Small Group ● Regents Prep offered, teachers also offer before and after school tutoring for their classes When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Each week during school day ● Four times a week for each of five classes ● Teachers offer before and after school tutoring for their classes ● Each week during school day ● During Lunchtime and after school ● Peer tutoring program ● One-to-one tutoring ● Offered two days a week after school ● Regents Prep offered, teachers also offer before and after school tutoring for their classes ● Global History and US Reader’s Workshop Classes for students who are ● Small Group ● During Lunchtime and after school ● Whole Class ● Small Group ● Each week during School Day 2018-19 CEP 27  ● ELL Students ● Student data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Anecdotal Records and referrals from teachers Parental requests currently struggling in the history class they are taking and/or who failed the Regents ● Regents Prep ● Mandated counseling ● Guidance Mediation Supports ● Justice Panels ● During Lunchtime and after school One-to-one and small groups One-to-one and small groups 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 8 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance counselors meet one-on-one with STH to provide individual support. We have an advisory program where we provide social & emotional support to all students, particularly STH. Students are also paired with mentors who guide them both academically and socially. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. · We recruit from the Open Market hiring system, New Teacher Finder, Hiring Fairs, New York City Teaching Fellows programs, and New Teacher Select Recruit systems. All of these teachers are highly qualified. · During interview process, conversations about potential electives were discussed with each new teacher. Teachers were made aware of the expectation of teaching an elective course. During these conversations, new teachers were also made aware of the college and career benefits of providing students with exposure to various topics. · During interview process, conversations about the Common Core ideology were discussed with each new teacher. Teachers were made aware of the expectation of implementing CCSS rigorous tasks. · During interview process, conversations about the advisory process were discussed with each new teacher. During new teacher training in August and during the first day of full faculty PD in September, the entire staff discussed the roles of the advisor and the behavioral policies that were in place at BPHS. · During interview process, conversations about the 8-week inquiry process were discussed with each new teacher. Teachers were made aware of the expectation of inquiry in grade team by colleagues and administrators. The first day of full faculty PD in September, the entire staff discussed the 8-week inquiry process and its purposes. · During interview process, conversations about the observation ideology were discussed with each new teacher. Teachers were made aware of the expectation of observing and being observed by colleagues and administrators regularly. Our yearlong professional development program helps teachers develop inquiry-based units, improve the rigor in day-=to-day instruction, and assess students and track their progress, ensuring that all teachers are highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2018-19 CEP 31  ● Faculty professional development weekly for 100 minutes is in full faculty and in department teams. Department work uses collaboration to build a unit template, then CCSS performance task and furthermore, daily lessons that align to the CCSS performance task. ● Grading discussions will be held with each teacher using passing rates and average grade percentages after the first and second marking periods. The data will be a springboard into conversations about personal beliefs of grading and the role of grades in teaching and learning. ● At subsequent full staff PDs, staff will be reminded of advisor roles in modifying behavior. Deans and administrators will follow up with teacher concerns as the year progresses, communicating with teachers the steps made with each individual student through Skedula and personally. ● All teachers attend the ISA summer institute where we break up into groups around advisory, portfolio, cohering Reading Writing and Discussion and other topics. Teachers flesh out each topic to implement in September. ● Accreditation Committee meets weekly to look over unit plans and lessons and checks them according to a rubric for alignment.  Paraprofessionals meet regularly with one of the Assistant Principals to ensure they are providing high-quality support to students.  The principal and assistant principals attend monthly meetings with the superintendent’s team and other principals/APs from the district to ensure that they engage in on-going professional learning. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2018-19 CEP 32  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our Professional Development Committee developed an assessment calendar for our DYO assessments. The English & social studies departments are using a self-created rubric for analyzing student writing across content areas. The Math & Science Departments are using data trackers aligned to the state standards. All of these documents were teacher-created as a part of our overall professional development program. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A,B,C,D,E Section 5A,B,C,D,E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 359,881.00 0 0 0 3.208.622.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 CEP 33  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Preparatory High Shool, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Brooklyn Preparatory High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Brooklyn Preparatory High School continues to have an open door policy to parents, along with many avenues to improve and foster more effective two way communication. These avenues have included increased methods of systematic communication, providing grade team time for parent involvement, and PTA meetings highlighted with student celebrations. Increased Systematic Communication: ● In August parents of incoming freshmen and new students are invited to attend an extensive information session. At this time parents are introduced to Brooklyn Prep. Expectations are conveyed about our four year graduation plan 2018-19 CEP 35  that will help them to become productive members of society. We convey to parents our instructional goals of 80+ in Math and Science exams, our Habits of Mind and Work, our portfolio process, and our expectation community service involvement. Parents ask questions about the tone of the schools, exams, and other pertinent concerns they might have. During freshman and newcomer orientation, parents are introduced to their child’s advisor and the advisory process in small groups. Parents of our IEP students are introduced to the Special education team and the ELL teachers. The diversity of our teachers has expanded to meet the changing needs of our school population. ● During September and October, there was a push to gain every email from parents. The school obtained 75% of parent emails. Every month there monthly calendars are sent to all parents. Our Dean of Student Services sends out weekly emails to parents informing them about opportunities provided to students. Emails are sent as necessary from Parent Coordinator. Parents email back the Parent Coordinator about events coming up in the school frequently. ● Daily automatic calls are made to students who arrive to school after 8:20. ● The guidance counselors reach out to parents and host two parents each week to support students: Who are academically struggling, who need support with financial aid, or who are in need of emotional development support. Grade Team Time: ● Professional development and grade team used by advisors to build and further relationships with the parents of their advisees, the goal is that advisors communicate with all parents on a monthly basis. ● Professional Development allows bi-monthly release time for teachers to call parents for positive anecdotals about their children. ● Grade Teams are given release time to update our online grading system, Skedula, so that parents can be informed of how their children are doing at the moment. PTA Meetings: ● Based on a survey completed by the parents last year, PTA meeting are held focusing on the specific needs of our parents. Parent interest surveys showed interest in bullying and cyber-bullying, internet and social network safety, understanding the Common Core, financial aid and scholarship 101, navigating the DOE, college and career success, as well as family financing resources. Other suggested activities and events include family museum visits and movie nights. ● So far, we have had sessions to: Introduced portfolio, celebrate Honor Roll students, convey our community service opportunities, provide information about financial aid, and host family game night. ● BPHS hosts a celebratory information session for parents of AP students to convey expectations of the course and for parents to meet Advance Placement teachers. ‘ Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of 2018-19 CEP 36  parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Preparatory High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Brooklyn Preparatory High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Increased Systematic Communication: ● In August parents of incoming freshmen and new students are invited to attend an extensive information session. At this time parents are introduced to Brooklyn Prep. Expectations are conveyed about our four year graduation plan that will help them to become productive members of society. We convey to parents our instructional goals of 80+ in Math and Science exams, our Habits of Mind and Work, our portfolio process, and our expectation community service involvement. Parents ask questions about the tone of the schools, exams, and other pertinent concerns they might have. During freshman and newcomer orientation, parents are introduced to their child’s advisor and the advisory process in small groups. Parents of our IEP students are introduced to the Special education team and the ELL teachers. The diversity of our teachers has expanded to meet the changing needs of our school population. ● During September and October, there was a push to gain every email from parents. The school obtained 75% of parent emails. Every month there monthly calendars are sent to all parents. Our Dean of Student Services sends out weekly emails to parents informing them about opportunities provided to students. Emails are sent as necessary from Parent Coordinator. Parents email back the Parent Coordinator about events coming up in the school frequently. ● Daily automatic calls are made to students who arrive to school after 8:20. ● The guidance counselors reach out to parents and host two parents each week to support students: Who are academically struggling, who need support with financial aid, or who are in need of emotional development support. Grade Team Time: ● Professional development and grade team used by advisors to build and further relationships with the parents of their advisees, the goal is that advisors communicate with all parents on a monthly basis. ● Professional Development allows bi-monthly release time for teachers to call parents for positive anecdotals about their children. ● Grade Teams are given release time to update our online grading system, Skedula, so that parents can be informed of how their children are doing at the moment. PTA Meetings: ● Based on a survey completed by the parents last year, PTA meeting are held focusing on the specific needs of our parents. Parent interest surveys showed interest in bullying and cyber-bullying, internet and social network safety, understanding the Common Core, financial aid and scholarship 101, navigating the DOE, college and career success, as well as family financing resources. Other suggested activities and events include family museum visits and movie nights. ● So far, we have had sessions to: Introduced portfolio, celebrate Honor Roll students, convey our community service opportunities, provide information about financial aid, and host family game night. 2018-19 CEP 37  ● BPHS hosts a celebratory information session for parents of AP students to convey expectations of the course and for parents to meet Advance Placement teachers. Increased Systematic Communication: Parental Involvement and School Quality ● In August parents of incoming freshmen and new students are invited to attend an extensive information session. At this time parents are introduced to Brooklyn Prep. Expectations are conveyed about our four year graduation plan that will help them to become productive members of society. We convey to parents our instructional goals of 80+ in Math and Science exams, our Habits of Mind and Work, our portfolio process, and our expectation community service involvement. Parents ask questions about the tone of the schools, exams, and other pertinent concerns they might have. During freshman and newcomer orientation, parents are introduced to their child’s advisor and the advisory process in small groups. Parents of our IEP students are introduced to the Special education team and the ELL teachers. The diversity of our teachers has expanded to meet the changing needs of our school population. ● During September and October, there was a push to gain every email from parents. The school obtained 75% of parent emails. Every month there monthly calendars are sent to all parents. Our Dean of Student Services sends out weekly emails to parents informing them about opportunities provided to students. Emails are sent as necessary from Parent Coordinator. Parents email back the Parent Coordinator about events coming up in the school frequently. ● Daily automatic calls are made to students who arrive to school after 8:20. ● The guidance counselors reach out to parents and host two parents each week to support students: Who are academically struggling, who need support with financial aid, or who are in need of emotional development support. Grade Team Time: ● Professional development and grade team used by advisors to build and further relationships with the parents of their advisees, the goal is that advisors communicate with all parents on a monthly basis. ● Professional Development allows bi-monthly release time for teachers to call parents for positive anecdotals about their children. ● Grade Teams are given release time to update our online grading system, Skedula, so that parents can be informed of how their children are doing at the moment. PTA Meetings: ● Based on a survey completed by the parents last year, PTA meeting are held focusing on the specific needs of our parents. Parent interest surveys showed interest in bullying and cyber-bullying, internet and social network safety, understanding the Common Core, financial aid and scholarship 101, navigating the DOE, college and career success, as well as family financing resources. Other suggested activities and events include family museum visits and movie nights. ● So far, we have had sessions to: Introduced portfolio, celebrate Honor Roll students, convey our community service opportunities, provide information about financial aid, and host family game night. ● BPHS hosts a celebratory information session for parents of AP students to convey expectations of the course and for parents to meet Advance Placement teachers. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 38  Increased Systematic Communication: ● In August parents of incoming freshmen and new students are invited to attend an extensive information session. At this time parents are introduced to Brooklyn Prep. Expectations are conveyed about our four year graduation plan that will help them to become productive members of society. We convey to parents our instructional goals of 80+ in Math and Science exams, our Habits of Mind and Work, our portfolio process, and our expectation community service involvement. Parents ask questions about the tone of the schools, exams, and other pertinent concerns they might have. During freshman and newcomer orientation, parents are introduced to their child’s advisor and the advisory process in small groups. Parents of our IEP students are introduced to the Special education team and the ELL teachers. The diversity of our teachers has expanded to meet the changing needs of our school population. ● During September and October, there was a push to gain every email from parents. The school obtained 75% of parent emails. Every month there monthly calendars are sent to all parents. Our Dean of Student Services sends out weekly emails to parents informing them about opportunities provided to students. Emails are sent as necessary from Parent Coordinator. Parents email back the Parent Coordinator about events coming up in the school frequently. ● Daily automatic calls are made to students who arrive to school after 8:20. ● The guidance counselors reach out to parents and host two parents each week to support students: Who are academically struggling, who need support with financial aid, or who are in need of emotional development support. Grade Team Time: ● Professional development and grade team used by advisors to build and further relationships with the parents of their advisees, the goal is that advisors communicate with all parents on a monthly basis. ● Professional Development allows bi-monthly release time for teachers to call parents for positive anecdotals about their children. ● Grade Teams are given release time to update our online grading system, Skedula, so that parents can be informed of how their children are doing at the moment. PTA Meetings: ● Based on a survey completed by the parents last year, PTA meeting are held focusing on the specific needs of our parents. Parent interest surveys showed interest in bullying and cyber-bullying, internet and social network safety, understanding the Common Core, financial aid and scholarship 101, navigating the DOE, college and career success, as well as family financing resources. Other suggested activities and events include family museum visits and movie nights. ● So far, we have had sessions to: Introduced portfolio, celebrate Honor Roll students, convey our community service opportunities, provide information about financial aid, and host family game night. ● BPHS hosts a celebratory information session for parents of AP students to convey expectations of the course and for parents to meet Advance Placement teachers. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 39  Brooklyn Preparatory High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● knowing our students well and supporting them as individuals ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core & State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas, including the arts; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Using an online data tool, Pupilpath, which provides parents real-time access to their child’s progress in class, attendance and behavior records, and progress towards graduation; ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: 2018-19 CEP 41  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● monitor my child’s academic progress on Pupilpath, the school’s online data system; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● strive to develop my Habits of Mind and Habits of Work in accordance with the school’s college-preparatory mission; 2018-19 CEP 42  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● knowing our students well and supporting them as individuals ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core & State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas, including the arts; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Using an online data tool, Pupilpath, which provides parents real-time access to their child’s progress in class, attendance and behavior records, and progress towards graduation; ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 44  Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● monitor my child’s academic progress on Pupilpath, the school’s online data system; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 45  ● strive to develop my Habits of Mind and Habits of Work in accordance with the school’s college-preparatory mission; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn 2018-19 CEP 46  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Brooklyn Preparatory High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 488 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Noah Lansner Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Diana Isern Teacher/Subject Area Liaisha White Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Diana Isern Coach School Counselor Qiana Spellman Parent Sheva Millington Parent Coordinator Ja'net Nelson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 541 2018-19 CEP 47 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.77%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our students are assessed throughout the semester through DYO Performance Assessments created by departments. The first DYO given in all English classes within the first two weeks. The data shows that students need specific targeting in organizational structures of essay writing, grammatical conventions and reading comprehension. This DYO data informs our school's instructional plan mainly through PD: The Grade Teams meet and discuss specific abilities and gaps of representative students relating to writing structure, grammar and reading comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ELL students are always chosen to analyze along with SWDs in addition to gen ed students at different abilities and skill levels. Additionally, Grade Teams get together and target one strategy to use with ELL students that they implement in their lessons for the following week. For example, in their instruction, the ninth grade team chose to focus on universal sentence starters to build on ideas, which would allow ELLs more structure in their writing. In their instruction, tenth grade team 2018-19 CEP 48  teachers chose to focus on supporting students in providing evidence to support ideas. Inter-visitations occur within teams around these problems of practice and strategies implemented. Observational data is collected by team members. After student work is also analyzed, teachers create re-teaching plans and lesson plan together based on the information gathered. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We determine the baseline, progress and needs of our ELL program by analyzing NYSESLAT data, scholarship and credit accumulation from previous years, Regents data and DYO assessments. All ESL students are accumulating credits on par with their English native peers. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have ongoing data analysis built into our Professional Development. Teachers in grade teams--and this year additionally in CFGs--use student work, data analysis, lesson tuning and lesson planning protocols in a feedback loop to address interventions. Additionally, teachers keep updated information on the students in Skedula program throughout the year. All teachers update their grades, assignments, progress and behavioral plans on this program which allows us to evaluate the success of our ELL program throughout the year. At the end of this year we will analyze summatively by using the NYSESLAT to compare specific outcomes of each student with each of the four modalities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In regards to supporting our ELLs within the RTI framework is as follows: Tier 1-Our curriculum is strengthened and made rigorous for the majority of our students through inquiry work. Teachers meet in grade teams three times a week to look at student data academically and behaviorally. The meet also in Departments to share and critique rigorous tasks that are differentiated for our SWD and ELLs. Tier 2-Extra attention is given to students through our programming. ELL students who need additional support in reading and writing are programmed with a Reader's workshop class. All of our 10-12 th grade ELLs had a Reader's Workshop and continue to this year. Tier 3-We did not have ELLs who were in need of academic intensive intervention this last year, however, on grade teams students who struggle over all classes are referred to kid talks. Kid talks feature parent contact and also strategies to keep students on track. Grade teams also figure out ways to support the student one on one, whether it be pull out, or other differentiation strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We did not have any students eligible for NYSITELL, however NYSESLAT performance indicates that most students (12 out of 15) score advanced on the exam and do particularly well in the communicative modalities of listening and speaking. We provide programming doubling of English to support their reading and writing needs. About half of our ELL students are also SWD, so we also use their IEPs to inform their programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The programmer, admin and special education teachers meet during the summer when programs are made using June and August Regents data, the students' course selections, and credit accumulation from years past, and then bi-monthly in the first two months to discuss and make necessary adjustments to the programs based on how students are performing. We then meet before second semester to make any adjustments to their second semester program based on credit accumulation and January Regents data. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP 49  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL population is small and most ELLs are advanced, so half of our services are maintained in integrated 9th grade double blocks with ENL and English co-teachers. The students are grouped in heterogenous ability in the ESL teacher's co-taught classes. The students are not blocked together; they will have the same ENL/English teacher, but not necessarily at the same period. For our upper level students, a few have Teacher Assistant roles to support their language, others have a small class setting focused on reading comprehension, and others received special education ICT services to support their learning needs. These few students are grouped into services based on ability. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All of our 15 students are Transitioning/Expanding students and thus receive 180 minutes in an ENL/ELA integrated classroom. Our students have a co-taught class that meets four days a week. We also have a small class that mimics SETSS classes for our upper class ELL students which gives us some flexibility. In this class they will focus on reading comprehension. Our Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA instruction in College Bridge classes designed to support their reading and writing. We do not currently have any Beginner/Entering or Low Intermediate/Emerging students, but they would respectively receive 540 or 360 minutes ELA/ESL and standalone instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Based on information from scholarship and credit accumulation, Regents data and DYO Performance Task Assessments (CCLS-aligned), our students are receiving language support in content areas that makes them successful here. Native language support in the ELA content area is provided through physical resources such as dictionaries and access to computers in every classroom if translation to native language is needed. ESL program teacher also uses purposeful grouping of students who have different language ability levels to provide native language support if necessary or tackling a higher level topic. Methods that are used from ESL teacher in ELA and supporting other contents include sheltered English approaches: Teachers meet in departments and ESL teacher shares how to modify their use of English to teach the core subjects they teach. They script lessons in order to modify the level of questions they pose, speak slower, use graphic organizers to clarify tasks, directly teach vocabulary and grammar; and continually relate lessons to students’ background knowledge and experience. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As all of our ELLs are at Transitioning or Expanding levels, we focus on English Language acquisition and supporting students towards passing Regents exams. Our Spanish teacher gives students in-house home language and second language screeners once every marking period. She tests for academic language in the four modalities in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 CEP 50  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In addition to the Professional Development that we do around inquiry based tasks and CCLS aligned teaching, for our SIFE students, we have focused on support in Regents Exams to which they have been extremely successful. Within our ELL model for our SIFE students we stress the use graphic organizers to clarify tasks for them, directly teach vocabulary and grammar and provide them word banks; and continually relate lessons to students’ background knowledge and experience. We believe that once they are in the school consistently, and with our supports, they will receive the instruction that will bridge their previous educational gaps, and this has been true. For newcomer ELLs and developing 4-6 year ELLs we service them through the previous methods as well as programming them with co-taught classes and tutoring support after school. For long-term ELLs, the focus is on supporting them the same way as our newcomers and 4-6 year ELLS with additional discussions around the NYSESLAT and the importance of giving effort to the exam. For our former ELLs, we place them in ICT classes where they can receive additional scaffolds and teacher attention. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Scaffolds in writing such as graphic organizers and note-taking T Charts are used largely in 9 th and 10 th grade for ELL-SWDs and in smaller part in 11 th and 12 th grade as the students need. Scafolds support English language acquisition by providing clarity around reading and writing, allowing students to organize ideas. Vocabulary banks are used for ELL-SWD throughout 9 th -12 th grade. Vocabulary banks accelerate English language acquisition by strengthening vocabulary in context. Formative Assessments are used daily as entry and exit tasks to keep students on track for ELL-SWD throughout 9 th -12 th grade; Progress Reports every 3 weeks are provided which utilize technology to keep students congizant of their progress. Both progress reports and formative assessments accelerate English language by providing teachers relevant and current informatio on the students and what concepts they are understanding. Teachers grade for grammar also, which supports students. Teachers in 9 th -12 th provide choice in projects which incorporate technology, writing and/or artistic choice so ELL-SWD can demonstrate understanding. There is also a heavy emphasis on content area teachers co-planning with ESL and Special Education teachers, so that the students are receiving mandated CTT in practice, not just in theory. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have an early release schedule that allows our teachers to meet together every Wednesday for two periods straight. During these PDs all teachers including content teachers, ESL teachers, SPED teachers, are involved in building CCLS-aligned Performance Tasks that all students are given. We engage in student work protocols and many times will choose ESL students and Special Education students to focus on. The student work protocols around ELL-SWD are particularly telling in order to distinguish if their learning needs are linguistic or learning processing related, or both. These protocols allow teachers to make refinements and reteach concepts that students are not grasping so that they can achieve their IEP goals. Teachers commonly meet, SPED and ESL together, and with content teachers to discuss individual students and their needs. ESL teachers are invited to IEP meetings where SPED teachers feel they need the most language support. Our scheduling of ELL-SWDs includes 5 CTT classes if that is suitable to their needs. One of these CTT classes features ESL teacher to support them in English. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our 9 th grade ELLs receive double blocks of ELA and Math. Our 10 th and 11 th grade ELLs receive double blocks of humanities with a Reader's Workshop focusing on themes of Global (10 th ) or US (11 th ) to support them in Regents exams in these grades. These services are all offered in English. Regents exams are provided in Spanish as well, as are assessment if students request. We only have one student however, that prefers only the Regents exam in Spanish. All other students prefer English in their daily reading and writing core classes. Students are provided lunch club support in these classes as well as Regents prep in December, June and August. Within classes, scaffolds in writing such as graphic organizers and vocabulary banks; Formative Assessments daily to keep students on track; Progress Reports every 3 weeks in all contents including ELA 2018-19 CEP 51  and Math; Providing choice in projects in all content areas that incorporate both writing and another mode they can use to demonstrate understanding; Heavy emphasis on co-planning with ESL and Special Education trained teachers, so that the content specialist isn't the "real" teacher and the ESL/SPED teachers are being intellectually utilized. We offer after-school tutoring and lunch clubs every day for students to receive extra support in all content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering having all 10 th grade ELLs, and possibly some advanced 9 th grade ELLs take the English Regents exam or CC exam to give them the opportunity to pass out and become Former ELLs. We want to provide additional times than only with the NYSESLAT, for students to demonstrate proficiency with the new mandates. We are also expanding our AP Spanish to two sections so that we can serve all ELLs and former ELLs in their home language in conjunction with ESL services. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None as of the moment. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs as they receive the information through advisory as all other students. They receive information about job shadows, community service, peer tutoring, college trips and Girls Be Heard through our hallway TV annoucements, loud speaker annoucements and advisory repetition of these annoncements. Advisors also counsel individually with students to make sure that they have opportunities and understand what we offer. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Beginner, Developing, Long Term and Former ELLs have laptop access in every classroom. These laptops are used to support teachers in providing content in various formats that will support ELLs. Beginners and Developing ELLs are provided laptops and smartboards that provide visual documentaries and explanations to support their understanding in Social Studies, English and Science classes. This subgroup in Math uses textbooks, teacher made materials to support them in Math. Advanced and Long term ELLs are provided laptops and smart board access to gain understanding through videos, images and perform research in SS, English and Science. Math is supported through scaffolds on teacher made materials and workbooks. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are tested with the ENL teacher in reading in the beginning of the year with a DYO reading assessment. Students are also tested in their native language by Spanish teacher and the materials used are articles and text response protocols. The ESL teacher employs parallel teaching or individual pull out with these students throughout the year in the resource room to gain a stronger understanding of home language and second language acquisition. As material resources, they are provided grammar books, worksheets or internet practice to support grammar in their writing. As the population is small, every student is able to be supported on a case by case basis. To further support native language, bilingual dictionaries are present and available, as are assessments if students request. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We place heavy emphasis on double blocks of english and math in 9th grade Since all 9th grade students have to take Algebra exam we put extra time for classes. Also, since reading and writing are cornerstones for success we place ELLs in double blocks to improve their academic writing. In the upper grades 10 th -12th we service our ELLs with more flexibility and case by case based on their needs and their opinions. We place ELLs in Reader's Workshops for Global and US which are extra classes to support Global and US classes. These workshop classes provide more time for academic reading and writing in these subject areas to support ELLs in these exams which are historically very difficult to pass. Additionally in upper grades we provide options for students to become Teacher Assistants to support newer ELLs and also support their own language access. We have provided upper level ELLs ability to take ELA exam as well to prove proficiency. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Beginner, Developing, Long Term and Former ELLs have laptop access in every classroom. These laptops are used to support teachers in providing content in various formats that will support ELLs. Beginners and Developing ELLs are provided laptops 2018-19 CEP 52  and smartboards that provide visual documentaries and explanations to support their understanding in Social Studies, English and Science classes. This subgroup in Math uses textbooks, teacher made materials to support them in Math. Advanced and Long term ELLs are provided laptops and smart board access to gain understanding through videos, images and perform research in SS, English and Science. Math is supported through scaffolds on teacher made materials and workbooks. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For newly enrolled ELLs--all of which have been incoming 9 th grade students with previous ELL designations--we have a summer bridge in August. All ELLs who will attend the school are called and mailed letters in both English and Spanish. The summer bridge is a way for newly enrolled ELLs as well as all 9 th and 10 th grade newly enrolled students, to get to know each other, understand the expectations of BPHS, and to be tested in reading, writing and math before they begin at our school. For incoming ELLs of other grades, we also have them participate in summer bridge. We have yet to have incoming ELLs in the middle of the year, but if we do we will pair them up with former ELLs of the same grade to guide them through their adjustment in the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish Level 1 and 2, AP Spanish Language and Literature, Latin Dance and International Film are language electives offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers will have two sessions during the day of CFGs where they will be meeting with co-teachers in the same department. In these meetings, our ENL teacher, sped teacher and English content teachers with meet to discuss students on a case by case basis. They will use classroom student work of ELLs to plan units and lessons that are differentiated with learning objectives derived from CCLS. During grade team meetings once a week after school, all teachers and counselors will break down data around cutting, attendance and other like issues of all students including ELLs. Our psychologist attends meetings on grade team level as they pertain to students he services who are ELLs. Additionally, ESL and SPED teachers are given Network As PD opportunities arrive from the OELL, we offer our ELL teachers time to go to these. During full days of PD like election day and chancellor's days, we will have for staff in all content areas of English, Math, Science, Art and Social Studies as well as Special Education and ESL teacher: Analysis of ELL student work, item analysis of ELL Regents exams, how to differentiate lessons for ELLs, creation of differentiated performance tasks that are rigorous for ELLs, implement feedback from accreditation committee about unit plans with specific differentiation strategies for ELLs.. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 CEP 53  Guidance Counselors meet after school once a week with the ESL administrator coordinator as professional development and discuss transition supports for ELL students including setting them up with peer mentors, peer tutoring, and brainstorm other ideas to transition the students academically and socially. We provide access to citywide PDs through the OELL. In house, all attendance and agendas are kept for each PD as well as a calendar for the entire year that can attest to the support our ELL teacher gets to support our ELLs. These records are with our Principal's Secretary. All teachers have three sessions of grade teams, where our ENL teacher, along with content area colleagues in English, Social Studies, Math, Arts and Science and Special Educators will discuss students on a case by case basis, create academic plans, plan advisory curriculum, disaggregate data around cutting, attendance and other like issues of all students including ELLs. ESL coordinator helps plans and attends these meetings on a rotating basis. Our psychologist attends meetings on grade team level as they pertain to students he services who are ELLs. Department meetings will occur once a week as well, where ELL students will be chosen once a month for student data analysis and student work analysis. Unit plans and lesson plans will reflect differentiated needs of ELL and Sped students and will be tuned in these meetings. I, as a certified ESL teacher, circle to all departments, and plan full staff PD that incorporates rigor and differentiation, so that SWD and ELLs can complete learning tasks. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have Spanish and Haitian Creole speaking parents. Annual meetings are held in conjunction with IEP meetings for SWD and at PTA meetings for other ELL parents. If parents are not available at either of those, parents are contacted by ESL coordinator or parent coordinator. Translation services available are: In house or contracted interpretation services through the DOE. They are available at all PTA, IEP meetings and Senior Activities so that these parents' involvement maintains and grows. Mailings are sent out in English and Spanish. Furthermore, teachers are made aware on our schoolwide system PupilPath, of the home language. We make sure when teachers call home that there is a bilingual pedagogue available. We have bilingual Arabic and Spanish speakers who are pedagogues in our school and whom we work with to provide parents of ELLs equal access to become involved. These pedagogues continually let us know about the needs of the parents. For example, we have many parents of ELLs indicate during PTA conferences that they did not know how to use our schoolwide system PupilPath. Therefore, this year we set up sessions at the PTA conferences to make accounts with a bilingual pedagogue to walk them through the process. We would like to provide additional workshops like these to parents, which are already being scheduled based on the feedback our new PTA President has received from other parents of ELLs. Describe translation services available. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our PTA President is a bilingual parent who reaches out to parents and translates all our documents that go to parents. She is present at every meeting and speaks to ELL parents. We meet together with Parent Coordinator twice a month on Mondays, in addition to Mondays of PTA and SLT meetings, to ensure that workshops are for the needs of ELL parents as well. We feature financial aid workshops, honor roll celebrations and cultural nights which all ELL parents receive invites in both languages and calls to let them know. Thus far, ELL parents have been Spanish speakers so our PTA President and Parent Coordinator are able to translate for them. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Noah Lansner, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn Preparatory HS School DBN: 14K488 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Noah Lansner Title Principal Diana Isern Assistant Principal Ja'Net Nelson Parent Coordinator Diana Isern ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sheva Millington Parent Liaisha White Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Qiana Spellman School Counselor Karen Watts Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 8/22/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8/22/17 8/22/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14K488 School Name: Brooklyn Preparatory HS Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS and ARIS are used to flag incoming 9th grade students classified as NYSITELL eligible, ELLs or having recently passed the NYSESLAT. These parents are given an informal intake assessment to determine translation needs in reading and speaking. We have not had recent newcomers, but when we have, these parents students are given the home language survey. Information gathered from the Home Language Survey and the intake interview determine if the parents or guardians need translation assistance. If the family member or guardian is then deemed in need of translation services, this is communicated to administration and staff accordingly. The advisors of the students get that information shared on a program called Skedula, and during first professional development, are shown how to get that ELL information about language and translation needs. The school's tranlsation needs are as follows: All ELL students documents are accurate and on our school-wide grading and information system, Skedula, students are listed as LEP. When teachers want to communicate with parents, they look at Skedula first, determine that the student is LEP and the teachers or advisors reach out to our 2018-19 CEP 58  community assistant or AP to translate documents. Teachers and/or advisors also reach out to our community assistant and administrator to make phone calls to the parents to serve our translation needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We deliver monthly BPHS bulletins and calendars with relevant information for parents. Additional parent conference information is provided in both languages. Also our parent page on our website is bilingual in Spanish for parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Written translations and oral interpretation services are provided in-house by school staff members. Both services are provided by Dean, provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 59  Community Assistant and ESL administrator. Written translations of the portfolio process, extracurricular and academic requirements and behavioral policies are available. These people are on call during Parent Teacher conferences or behavioral meetings with Dean. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent Coordinator posts the Welcome Poster, Parents' Bill of Rights, Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guide in the main office posted on the bulletin board. The Language ID Guide is at security desk. Other documents are taken from the templates online or translated in house. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We provide the parent survey during Parent Teacher Conference. Additionally, our PTA president is bilingual and polls parents on their needs. The PTA President and Vice President meets with a small group of parents after every PTA meeting to gather information on what they felt about the workshop, and what they need in the next meeting and overall. 2018-19 CEP 60 
