2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K502 School Name: FDNY HIGH SCHOOL FOR FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY Principal: JAMES ANDERSON 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 331900011502 9-12 400 Pennsylvania Ave. 718-688-7930 Section 1: School Information Page School Information FDNY-Capt. Vernon Richard HS for Fire and Life Safety School Number (DBN): 19k502 Phone Number: 718-922-0593 Fax: James Anderson JAnders@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: James Anderson Brian Nordt AboliaBlair James Anderson CherlannAponte Joseph Dorismond RalolaBlair Michele Maglione District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396Broadway Brooklyn, NY 11221 JRoss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-923-5124 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St. Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James Anderson Brian Nordt AboliaBlair Mildred Bowman CherylannAponte Joseph Dorismond RalolaBlair MargarattaWilson ArlethiaRivera Sandra Chapman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Then Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a small thematic school whose mission is to recruit minority students from the East New York community to become certified EMTs or Fire Fighters within the New York City Fire Department. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. FDNY-Capt. Vernon Richard HS is special and unique in that we have a vital working partnership with the FDNY. The FDNY provides personnel and equipment to train the students in the emergency services. We have certified EMT’s and Fire Fighters on site teaching and working with the students every day. We have a four-year course sequence that covers all aspects of firefighting: responsibilities, the science of fighting fire, life-saving skills, and a NYS EMT certification class. When students graduate from our school with the New York State EMT certification and are 18 years or older, they can be hired as an EMT by the FDNY. Over the last eleven years (the eleven graduating classes in the school’s history), we have certified 190 students as Emergency Medical Technicians. Currently, 130 of these former students are using their certification to work as full-time EMT’s with both the FDNY and private ambulance companies. As of this year, we have twenty-eight former students presently working with the FDNY as certified EMT’s. In addition, we have two students that used the promotional opportunities and are currently NYC Fire Fighters. However, by the Fall/Winter of 2017/2018, we are expecting another 20-30 former graduates to finish their hiring process and become full-time employees of the FDNY. The effort of the FDNY has made a significant impact on the lives of many of our students contributing to their academic success. There is no other opportunity like this in the City of New York, and from our knowledge, the rest of the country. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a school, 28% of our students come to use with Special Needs. 90% of our students with special needs are scheduled in the ICT setting. The final 10% of our special needs children are in the self-contained setting. Lastly, 4% of our population is ELL. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our best academic accomplishment from 2017-2018 year was that we had a graduation rate around 74%. This success was due to the strong effort of the staff in providing a supportive environment for the students. Although we challenged the students to work for the highest potential in their academic performance, we also provided the social and emotional support to carry them along the path. Teachers collaborated in teams to assess and monitor the progress of the students. Lastly, the parental collaboration also helped to communicate the expectations and keep the three components of a student's success (student, parent, and school) on the same track for the accomplished goal. Despite our successes with graduating students, we still struggle with the amount of students showing significant scoring increases on the Math and English Regents exams. This has had a damaging effect on our AYP data as well as college readiness status. The area of focus for this issue is going to be rigorous instruction and classroom discussions. We will continue to focus on instructional strategies and inquiry analysis as we make instructional goals for the school 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  year. In addition, we will continue to address the social/emotional supports to address the low performance of our children when it comes to standardized exams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K502 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 333 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 18 19 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 79.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 23.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.1 5% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 68% 58% 69.6% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 133 119 4 79.9% 3.6% 25.5% 71.8% 0.6% 3.0% 2 30% 9.7 N/A N/A 73% 57% 75.8% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The staff will be organized to work in two sets of teacher teams where they analyze student data to make instructional and curricular decisions. The department teams are responsible for updating and modifying the curriculum maps as well as the unit plans. They work in collaboration to discuss students’ progress data from the Regents exams as well as on going classroom assessments. This information is used during discussions to make plans for curriculum. A professional development team will be created to plan the professional development topics as well as sessions to help improve the teacher practice in the classroom around designing rigorous tasks which are aligned to the CCLS. They will also identify and focus the teaching practices of 3b to increase students conversations during the learning process. The cohort teams look at student performance (from marking period report cards and transcripts) and make collaborative instructional decisions on an interdisciplinary basis to improve student achievement. Lastly, technology is implemented in most classrooms. Teachers will utilize Permethium Boards and laptops to make lessons engaging. Addition literacy programs purchased by school funds will also have students using online programs to improve academic skill sets. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 15 By June 2019, we will increase the level of student thinking by having more student -centered instruction using the 5-30-10 model within tasks and assignments assigned as documented in our Unit Plans to increase student performance on all Regents Exams by 50%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will establish teacher teams, create a professional development committee, and design a professional development plan. This plan will be designed to address the common areas of weakness to focus on targeted improvement in regards to professional practice in classroom discussion and planning for rigorous activities. The professional development sessions will be held every Monday afternoon. Competency 3b will be the primary areas of focus for the staff and administration. The administration will follow up the work during the observational process. Teachers will be provided professional development within the Danielson competencies to provide multiple entry points to include ELL’s and SWD’s into the learning process. We will focus on the ICT setting and roles of cooperating teachers in this collaborative setting. This focal point will take place to address the academic progress of our ELL and SWD populations. The strategies we design and implement will be communicated through written newsletters, automated phone calls, individual phone calls, and meetings. Through the PTA and SLT, workshops will be planned for parents to learn best practices in these areas at an incremental level. Our teacher teams will analyze student data as the school year progresses. The teacher teams will do item analysis exercises with both Regents sets (June and January), they will analyze ongoing assessments and tasks assigned within classrooms, they will utilize the report cards data as the marking periods close, and they will use other attendance data from ATS to make decisions with the students. The administrators will work with the teams as well as supervise the teachers with these practices during the observation cycles. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 School Administration and teachers. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Communication with the parents is vital with the process. Parents will be notified and given explanations for the plans through letters and mailings, phone calls, presentations at PTA and SLT meetings, and during the fours parent/Teacher Conferences held through the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to put the strategies in place above, we will need the necessary budget to cover expenses, allotted time within the school year schedule, assistance/guidance from our Borough Support Center, and outside vendors with reputable knowledge in the areas of need. We will use our funds to hire outside vendors to provide professional development to the staff and allocate funds for teachers to attend trainings during the course of the school day. Per diem funds will also be scheduled to pay for covering teachers during these sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year, February 2019, the school teams will evaluate the progress of our plans against the collected data. We will primarily analyze the January Regents results and how the students performed on the exams. The teacher teams will review the item analysis reports to identify trends and gaps in the multiple choice and short answer sections of the exams. In addition, they will analyze the essay portions to discuss writing strategies to enhance students performance in this area. Lastly, we will compare exam results against credits accumulation to find discrepancies with in-class assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will conduct a self-assessment with a team that includes administrators, teachers, parents, and students. We will conduct a walk-through with a checklist of items to survey from our list of priorities to review. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? When analyzing our OORS data, 37% of our incidents come from the classroom setting. Only a small percentage of the incidents (7%) reach the 4 or 5 severity level. Most of the students involved in these situations deal with anger issues, poor decisions making skills, and other stressful external circumstances. We find that the majority of these stduents fall behind in their academic track towards graduation. We have been in the process of improving our overall school environment and climate for the past few years. We have created a learning environment where each child is known by name by the staff members. A campus council will be created with students from all four schools to discuss and plan interventions to improve our school climate.We will create an intervention team where students in need will be identified, classified within target groups, and provided additional support through the school year from our guidance counselors. In addition, support includes mentoring from the teachers before and after classes. Lastly, constant communication between teachers, guidance counselors, and administrators are held to discuss student social/emotional issues that negatively affect their academic progress on a consistent basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will design a system, comprised of administrators, teachers,and guidance counselors, that will prevent student behaviors that lead to disciplinary actions to show a 25% drop in principal suspensions as recorded in OORS. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will establish a Culture Team that will study through research-based projects where schools change learning environments. The team will review school processes as well as create professional development opportunities for implementing positive practices. We will engage in professional development activities around classroom management and engagement (Competencies 2d and 3c)strategies to ensure a safe, supportive school environment for all. The classroom management strategies will be taken from the Danielson rubric as well as other research resources that help with student behavior in the classroom. We will continue to update student data regarding incidents, successes, and next steps in our effort to maintain a supportive environment. Guidance counselors will create plans for students that exhibit the social/emotional behaviors that prohibit academic success. Through these plans, they will be able to provide the proper counseling for their emotional issues. The transparency will lead to commitment from student and deepen trust amongst all our community. Our special education teachers will monitor the behaviors of the students in their caseloads and provide necessary interventions in the classroom as well as with other services outlined in their IEP's. This work will lead to higher scores on state assessments for all demographics of students; general ed., SWD's, and ELL's. The school continues to inform parents of the supports provided to their children through verbal and written communication (ie. Newsletters and PTA meetings) as well as workshops during our monthly meetings. This will help our parents work from home to help keep the communication line open between families and school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 25 students identified by the guidance counselors identified in accordance with Step Up criteria. Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and teachers. 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Students 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and parents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize our parent liaison to make home contacts with parents to ensure they are abreast of all situations involving the students. Teachers and guidance counselors will utilize the Tuesday afternoon time for parent outreach to contact parents about the behavior of the students in the classrooms. We will discuss behavior trends in the school with the parents at PTA meetings, SLT meetings, and other special parent events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to put the strategies in place above, we will need the necessary budget to cover expenses, allotted time within the school year schedule, assistance/guidance from our Borough Support Center, and outside vendors with reputable knowledge in the areas of need. Funds will be set aside to hire outside vendors to provide professional development to the staff during allotted Chancellor days. Per diem funds will be scheduled to pay for covering teachers as they attend training sessions during the school day. Per session funds will also be scheduled to pay staff to prepare and provide professional development session to the rest of the staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year, February 2019, the school teams will evaluate the progress of our plans against the collected data. We will use the OORS report to compare the number of incidents from the current year against the number of incidents from the previous year at this time period. In addition, we will analyze the OORS data sets to identify increases or decreases in areas oc concern (class passing, cafeteria, classrooms, dismissal, etc.) We will identify any discrepancies in the data sets and make adjustments to the strategies as necessary. Using this information we will make our decision with the goal for the remainder of the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will conduct a self-assessment with a team that includes administrators, teachers, parents, and students. We will conduct a series of walk-throughs with a checklist provided from the Office of Youth Development to survey the conditions of the school throughout the year. Meetings will be held to discuss the findings as well a design plans for improvement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Despite our success with students graduating high school, we are not meeting the NYS/NYC expectations for college readiness scores in both ELA and Math. Currently, 31% of the senior cohort is on track to meet College Readiness in ELA. In addition, 14% are on track to meet College Readiness in Math. Teachers will be analyzing Regents results as well as ongoing assessments to identify patterns or trends of deficiency from the students. In teacher teams they will make instructional decisions for improving these areas. Teacher will plan effective lessons that provide alignment between the goals, skills, and content taught. Lesson plans will reflect the CCLS addressed and multiple entry ways which students are led to engage in the learning. Teachers will pre-plan scaffolded sequences of questions and use questioning techniques that support students’ security to participate in classroom discussions. Teachers will consistently refer back to data sets (in-class assessments, assignments, exams, projects, exit tickets, etc.) to make ongoing instructional decisions that help increase student involvement in the classroom. Teachers will work collaboratively within teacher teams to discuss target groups of students to meet the NYS benchmark numbers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the levels of student engagement in the classroom by using data form the inquiry findings within our teacher teams and instructional practices learned during our professional development sessions to address the academic deficiencies of the students to increase our college readiness scores in both ELA and Math as per the Regents scores in these subject areas by 35%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will use the Danielson Rubric as guidance to planning proper instruction within this goal. All instructional conversations amongst teachers and administrators will be centered around the key strategies described in the teaching framework. The focal competencies will be in questioning, student engagement, and assessing learning. Teachers will be provided professional development within the Danielson competencies to provide multiple entry points to include ELL’s and SWD’s into the learning process. These strategies will be outlined in our professional development plan and carried out during our Monday scheduled sessions. Teacher inquiry teams will analyze the student performance from previous June and coming January Regents. As collaborative teams, they will identify student weaknesses and create plans for improvement. In addition, they will identify and create a target group of students for each cohort to meet the percentage goal above. By making target groups for each cohort, we will create a system to influence students outcomes earlier and students reach the College Readiness levels before their junior year. They will also share strategies, discuss challenges, and assess their ongoing attempts to improve student performance during common planning time. The professional development committee will discuss the needs of the staff and create plans for improvement within the PD structure. Parents will be notified of their child's status for graduation as well as college readiness. We have an open door policy whereby parents are encouraged to observe their children in class. This practice enables families to gain further insight into what students are learning and how teaching practices are employed across the school. The embedded teaching strategies will be presented to parents during PTA and SLT meetings for their understanding of how learning is expected to occur within our classrooms. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and teachers. Students 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration, teachers, parents, and students. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration, teachers, and parents. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Our parent liaison will be responsible for communicating all the pieces to this process. She will do this through phone calls, newsletters, and presentations at PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to put the strategies in place above, we will need the necessary budget to cover expenses, allotted time within the school year schedule, assistance/guidance from our Borough Support Center, and outside vendors with reputable knowledge in the areas of need. Funds will be set aside to hire outside vendors to provide professional development to the staff during allotted Chancellor days. Per diem funds will be scheduled to pay for covering teachers as they attend training sessions during the school day. Per session funds will also be scheduled to pay staff to prepare and provide professional development sessions to the rest of the staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year, February 2019, the inquiry teams will analyze the January Regents results for the targeted students. In addition, the administrative cabinet will analyze the Advance data for competency 3c from teacher observations. This data will help identify strengths and weaknesses of the instructional staff to improve their practice and students achievement levels on the Regents Exams. We will determine if we are on pace to meet the goal or have to make modifications to our plan by the passing results on the January exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will conduct a self-assessment with a team that includes administrators, teachers, parents, and students. We will conduct a walk-through with a checklist of items to survey from our list of priorities to review. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The attendance rate dipped slightly this past year to 79%. Moving forward this year, we plan to use out team to use data to make system decision. These data sets will come from ATS where we look at absence reports, cut reports, and lateness reports. The team will look to make target groups based on trends identified to help reach specific students for specific reasons. These reasons will also include academic performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our attendance team comprised of teachers, school aides, guidance counselors, and the principal will work analyzing data and creating plans to increase our overall school attendance rate by 5%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will create an attendance plan to record, analyze, and monitor students attend. In this plan, we will look at overall student attendance for the day as well as attendance by period. Teachers will be provided professional development within the Danielson competencies to provide multiple entry points to include ELL’s and SWD’s into the learning process. These strategies will be applied to address the individual needs of every student in the classroom. By improving these teacher practices, students will be more engaged in their classes and will be more willing to attend school. The principal and AP’s will observe together to ensure for norming and to provide feedback to one another about their observation practices and support of teachers. This process will strengthen the instructional habits of the entire staff to improve the school culture. During each monthly PTA and SLT meeting the ongoing data from the ATS reports regarding student attendance will be reviewed. The discussions will focus on identified issues, targeted strategies for improvement, and next step planning for assessment. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Guidance counselors, School Aides, Teachers, and Principal Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Guidance counselors, School Aides, Teachers, and Principal 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration and teachers. School Administration 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration, teachers, and parents. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent liaison will communicate the plan wiht parents. She will be able to do this through phone calls, newsletters, and presentations at our PTA and SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  In order to put the strategies in place above, we will need the necessary budget to cover expenses, allotted time within the school year schedule, assistance/guidance from our Borough Support Center, and outside vendors with reputable knowledge in the areas of need. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year, February 2019, the school teams will evaluate the progress of our plans against the collected data from ATS and STARS. We will look to see if we can reach the 6% increase mark by June. If not, we will make modifications to the plan. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will conduct a self-assessment with a team that includes administrators, teachers, parents, and students. We will look at the data sets from ATS and evaluate the processes and systems we have in place. We will make adjustments accordingly to ensure we meet the goal by June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Communication with parents is vital for the academic success if our students. The priority in this area is to inform parents of their child’s academic progress and the benefits of meeting all the expectations we set for the students. The school will have several systems in place to properly communicate with parents regarding the student performance. Within the system, we use monthly newsletters written by the principal that are mailed home. We will follow up with our communication by sending out automated phone messages with all important information outlined in the newsletter. In addition to the automated phone calls, personal phone calls are made to targeted parents because of their child’s specific needs including at risk of not meeting college ready benchmarks. We will hold monthly Town Hall Meetings with the students so they are always informed of necessary information. In addition, flyers and notices will be distributed to students in their classes as the school year progresses. All of the information communicated to the parents regarding student achievement comes from STARS and ATS. We show parents the trajectory of their child inregards to the College Readiness levels as well as the expected graduation date. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  By June 2019, all members of the school staff, administrators, teachers, guidance counselors, and school aides, we will participate in the communication expectations for the school in order to have a 5% increase in communication scores as per the data recorded on the School Environment Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the school year we will be identifying students that are at risk for not meeting the college and career benchmarks and organizing them within our teacher-team data sets. The teacher teams will create instructional goals to address the needs of the students. Using ongoing assessment data, the team will monitor the progress of the students as the school year continues. With the help of the guidance counselors, the staff will make necessary communication efforts through phone calls, marking period progress reports, and other individual attempts to contact parents to share student progress information. All newsletter and documents provided during the session will be translated for parents that don't read or speak English as their first language. IN addition, staff members that are bilingual will be present at the meetings to help with translation for parents that don't speak English as a native language. For programming purposes, all students who have passed ELA and Math but have not met the college readiness benchmarks will have classes within their daily schedule as well as Saturday/PM tutoring services. Teacher teams will analyze all Regents with specific attention to ELA and Math to design lessons to better prepare the students for the Regents exams. Town Hall meetings will be conducted within the cohorts to emphasize the importance of students not only graduating but also striving to be college ready upon graduation. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration, guidance counselors, and teachers. Students 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration, guidance counselors, and teachers. Conferences and process for ongoing meetings with the guidance counselors will help parents feel comfortable to discuss their child’s college or post-high school plans. Students 9/2018-6/2019 We will host meetings and design specific presentations for the parents to understand all the components of the college readiness measures for their child to succeed. In addition, we will emphasize the benefits of not only graduating but also graduating at the college ready levels for post-secondary education. For parents who are English Language Learners, teachers will attend to act as translators so they can understand the material being presented during the sessions. Parents 9/2018-6/2019 School Administration, guidance counselors, teachers, parents, and students. School Administration, guidance counselors, teachers, parents, and students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to put the strategies in place above, we will need the necessary budget to cover expenses, allotted time within the school year schedule, assistance/guidance from our Borough Center, and outside vendors with reputable knowledge in the areas of need. Funds will be set aside to hire outside vendors to provide professional development to the staff during allotted Chancellor days. Per diem funds will be scheduled to pay for covering teachers as they attend training sessions during the school day. Per session funds will also be scheduled to pay staff to prepare and provide professional development session to the rest of the staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the mid-point of the school year 2018-2019, February 2019, the school teams will evaluate the progress of our plans against the collected data. During our SLT and PTA meetings, we will take surveys in relation to the School Environment Survey to ensure we make progress against with deficient areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will conduct a self-assessment with a team that includes administrators, teachers, parents, and students. We will conduct a walk-through with a checklist of items to survey from our list of priorities to review. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will use the plans to meet the expected College Readiness scores for both Math and ELA. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The opportunities provided by the school will be advertised to the students through flyers/noticed, in-school announcements, visible posters hung around the school, messaging from the teachers in scheduled classes, discussions at COSA meetings, discussions in Town Hall Meetings, letters sent home, phone calls made home, and celebration incentives. The students identified needing additional support in the target groups will be programmed for specific tutoring programs after school and on Saturday mornings. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. As for students identified for AIS, we will begin by programming the students on an individual basis according to the schools AYP status and their promotional/graduation needs. These classes will be included in their program during the regular school day. The school believes in the discovery learning process and designs instruction so that students are learning amongst each other. During these segments of lesson, students will have opportunities to perform 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  manipulatives and put their analytical skills to use. As the budget allows, we will implement a variety of after-school and Saturday tutoring programs, after-school clubs, and activities. The classes covered in the tutoring programs will be ELA, Algebra, Living Environment, and Global Studies. We will create and offer workshops to parents around college readiness and setting high expectations within the home to work collaboratively with the school. The connection with guidance counselors and communication with their services amongst the entire staff will help with the social and emotional needs of the students. Teachers will identify students and their needs through the inquiry process of the teacher teams. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The school administrators will be responsible for overseeing the programs. The program will be discussed and planned within the teacher teams, at parent meetings (SLT and PTA), and during Town Hall Meetings with the students. The school aides and teachers will monitor the student participation and achievement with the work during the school year as well. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 30– June 30 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. In order to put the strategies in place above, we will need the necessary budget to cover expenses, allotted time within the school year schedule, assistance/guidance from our Borough Center, and outside vendors with reputable knowledge in the areas of need. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will look at the student participation rate, student attendance, and student results on the January Regents and student results for credit accumulation. We will look to see that we are on track to meet the AYP benchmark numbers for the remainder of the school year and make the necessary modifications. . Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  The instruments mentioned above are the Regents exams, transcripts from STARS, and attendance from ATS. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) The students selected for services are those not meeting collegereadiness expectations as per their Regents scorein this area. The students selected for services are those not meeting collegereadiness expectations as per their Regents scorein this area. The students selected for services are those not meeting collegereadiness expectations as per their Regents scorein this area. The students selected for services are those not meeting collegereadiness expectations as per their Regents scorein this area. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Achieve 3000, APEX, Pm School, Saturday School, individual student programming Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Large group, small group, one-to-one, tutoring, on-line classes. During school day, after school, weekends, online from home. APEX, Pm School, Saturday School, individual student programming Large group, small group, one-to-one, tutoring, on-line classes. During school day, after school, weekends, online from home. APEX, Pm School, Saturday School, individual student programming Large group, small group, one-to-one, tutoring, on-line classes. During school day, after school, weekends, online from home. APEX, Pm School, Saturday School, individual student programming Large group, small group, one-to-one, tutoring, on-line classes. During school day, after school, weekends, online from home. Group counseling, individual counseling Group counseling, individual counseling During school day 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 18 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The students in temporary housing receive additional support from our guidance counselors. These students are scheduled for counseling conferences to ensure their social/emotional health is cared for when needed. The guidance counselors within the school will be the first line of support. For those that need additional or deeper management, they will be able to see a counselor through BMS and Catholic Charities. In addition, the school provides additional supply and equipment needs the students have to help them pursue their educational goals. These students will have basic educational resources like book bags, notebooks, pens/pencils, paper, and other learning materials made available. These students will also be provided resources for personal health like clothing, shoes, health care, and other emergency supplies. Lastly, these students are included in all the AIS structures we set up in the school outlined above. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We hold professional development sessions within our own school staff along with the support from our Borough Support Staff. These session focus on the teaching expectations outlined in the Danielson Rubric; specifically in components 3b and 3c for our school. The PD options also include choosing assessment tools and how to apply data to make instructional decisions. In addition, teachers attend outside professional development sessions within their content areas that they are able to turn-key within the staff settings. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teachers are given voice in this area during our PD session and Common Planning Time. As for PD, we create a team that helps with the PD Plan. We identify areas of weakness and decide on the items to focus on. In addition, teachers find areas where students struggle academically from our inquiry work. They decide if they need PD assistance to help teach strategies that want to focus on in the classroom. These topics are covered in the PD Plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 227,670 0 0 0 0 0 2,302,670 X 0 0 0 0 0 X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e,6, 7, 8, 9 0 0 0 0 0 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, 6, 7 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. FDNY-Capt. Richard HS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students FDNY HS will support and engage parents and guardians of Title I students in several ways. We will conduct our annual Title I parent meeting at the first PTA meeting of the year so meet compliance to do so by October 30th. At this meeting, all the regulations regarding the process of Title I funds for SWP schools like us will be explained. We will also review the exact allocations and 1% designated for parent involvement. As a school we will also be providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels. Continuing along the support efforts, we will be providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. Requests will be made to the parents at PTA meetings to discuss areas they recognize for support. The school will foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. A written parent newsletter will be provided each month with important 2018-19 SCEP-P 44 Parental Involvement and School Quality  information for the upcoming weeks. This will be followed by phone calls made with an automated system as well as individual phone calls from designated staff members. At PTA meetings, we will be providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments. The PTA and SLT will be providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Lastly, all sharing of information about the school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities will be done in a format and in languages that parents can understand. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school within our first two PTA meetings. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, will be consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy. Our first monthly newsletter and series of phone calls will explain that this process will be discussed at our first PTA meeting. This is where parents will be asked for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. This will be done at our monthly PTA meeting as well as during our monthly SLT meeting. Parents and guardians will be engaged in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement. The list of NYCDOE options will be shared and discussed. However, the parents will have the decision making autonomy for this allocation of funds. Over the course of the school year, the PTA/SLT will ensure with the school administration that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. These events and strategies will include distribution tables during Parent/teacher Conferences, invited presenters at PTA meetings, workshops for parent groups, college meetings for parents, and possible fund raising events. Our school-level committees include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee. Together they will provide technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills. This will be done within our scheduled monthly PTA meetings. FDNY-Capt. Richard HS has a dedicated staff person to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The dedicated staff person will provide assistance with organizing parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The dedicated staff person will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the principal’s office. The parent teams will be asked to participate in parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy, accessing community and support services and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. Lastly, through these parent meeting settings, we will provide opportunities to train parents so they can better understand the accountability systems like, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) FDNY-Capt. Richard HS , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The school will provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments. This will be done in our classrooms by using academic learning time efficiently, respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences within our daily lessons, implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards as indicated in our teacher developed Unit Plans, offering high quality instruction in all content areas as per the Danielson Rubric agreed upon by the NYCDOE and UFT, and providing instruction by highly qualified teachers. When this last piece does not occur, we will notify parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The parents/guardians and school administration have agreed to support home-school relationships and improve communication by conducting two parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual student’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related. We also agreed to convene an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. We will be for arranging additional meetings at other flexible times. If necessary, transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting due to this issue will be provide transportation as well as child care services if funding is available. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Over the course of the school year, we will provide parents reasonable access to staff. This will occur by have providing access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. We have written and verbal communication going out notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member to discuss issues. Skedula is our on-line system to help bridge communication amongst teachers and parents. They will be able to email each other for instant access should an issue arise. We also arrange opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classes. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Lastly, we spend time teaching the parents their rights as it pertains to filing a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities As parents work with the school staff to provide the best education for our children, they will assist from home to with the several key structures. Parent/Guardians will monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. They will use the school notifications as well as Skedula to review their child’s daily attendance. They will ensure their child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. Parent/guardians will check and assist their child in completing homework tasks. AS for some social structures, parent/guardians will set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games. They will also limit and monitor their child’s exposure and involvement with social media websites. They will promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time. Parent/guardians will encourage their child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child. When events or options develop, parent/guardians will volunteer in their child’s school or assist from my home as time permits. If time permits, they will participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. Lastly, to ensure everyone is on the same page for every child’s academic progress, parent/guardians will communicate with their child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district. To help the school monitor the progress of our plans aligned with parent involvement, parent/guardians will respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested. Parent/guardians will also participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. Lastly, parents will share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of their child. III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities Students will attend school regularly and arrive on time. IN order to achieve at their highest potential, students will complete their homework and submit all assignments on time. When it comes to school culture and tone of the building, all students will follow the school rules and be responsible for their actions. As students do this, they will show respect for themselves, other people and property. When conflicts arise, students will resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully. In conclusion, as students plan forward for their future, they will always try their best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name FDNY High School for Fire and Life Safet Borough Brooklyn School Number 502 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal James Anderson Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Richard Klienman Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Angela Eversley Coach N/A School Counselor Ashley Melo Parent type here Parent Coordinator type here Field Support Center Staff Member Anthony Pizzillo Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 368 2018-19 SCEP-P 48 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.08%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess early litearcy skills of ELL students, our school uses a language placement exam. Students are administered this exam at the beginning of each year to determine their reading level. The placement exam is designed to determine where to begin instruction within the Language! program 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are provided professional development to ensure accuracy in denoting students reading levels to support their development throughout the school year 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  To evaluate the success of the ENL program, our school examines the instructional model and student data. Throughout the year, we examine student progress on exams, class grades, credits and attendance. We look for trends amongst varoius populations of students, including the lowest third, ELL's, and Special Eudcation students. Additionally, teachers evaluate if students are placing out of ESL or graduating from high school. Teachers, administrators, grade level inquiry teams and the school wide Inquiry Team constantly review school programs and student progress to determine the success of our programs 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL teachers meet with the English three times a week to engage in inquiry cycles. Together the teachers use formative and summative assessments to identify students needs and then develop action plans to address the deficient areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Applies to K-5. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data collected from the LAB-R and the NYSESLAT results, data shows a consistent pattern of students testing orally proficient, yet at a much lower level in reading and writing across all grades. We also have a large number of long term ELLs who sturggle with language acquisiton, which is partly due to deficiencies in their home language 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During our cohort team meetings, teachers discuss inquiry team finding based on grade levels and teachers are given a series of resources to support the ELLs in their classes Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. FDNY implements a Small Group ELL instructional/Freestanding ENL program as well as integrated ENL in ELA and History courses from grades 9-12. Students are categorized by proficiency level (entering,emerging, transitioning,expanding and commanding) and receive ENL services in Stand Alone ENL classroom and push in to Common Core subject areas. The primary goal of our ENL program is to promote full English proficiency in a supportive, judgment-free classroom environment. In addition, their literacy and academic language expands and provides students with skills that will allows them to perform at grade level in their subject areas b. TBE program. If applicable. This program is not offered at this school. c. DL program. If applicable. This program is not offered at this school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  "Entering" students receive at least 540 minutes of ENL instruction time per week. "Emerging" students receive at least 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. "Transitioning" students receive at least 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. "Expanding" students receive at least 180 minute of ENL instruction per week and "Commanding" students are considered "former ELLs" and receive services for an additional 2 years. We support students using Stand ALone and integrated ENL supports within ELA and HIstory courses 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered in English to fully immerse students in this new language. Students use texts that are modified or supported with graphic organizers, visual, auditory aids and other learning tools in order to aid in comprehension. ENL students read the same texts as native speakers in order to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL students are supported by ENL teachers and general educators as well. Multiple modalities are implemented such as audio books, flashcards, tactile manipulatives and sentence starters, which are used to enhance instruction and prepare students for the rigor of the Common Core. Students receiving ENL services used the Vision ESL series, Rosetta Stone Interactive Software and National Geographic EDGE curriculum. These programs focus on phonemic awareness, morphology, reading comprehension, grammar, spelling and writing skills. In addition the SMART board and Macintosh computers are at the student's disposal within the classroom for translation and educational software. The ENL teacher also works collaboratively with subject teachers to accommodate individual students' instructional needs, learnings styles and classroom success 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are placed into ENL programs in accordance with the most recent LAB-R results or NYSESLAT results. In addition to ENL, students have access to support services that help transition into high school (Counseling or Academic Intervention Services (AIS))b. Beginner ELLs (1-3 years) receive 540 minutes of ENL service per week. Beginner ELLs (1-3 years) are provided three 45 minute ENL classes per day. Beginner ELLs are taught in two setting. They are given stand alone ENL instruction in small self-contained classes, homogeneously grouped according to proficiency level. Instruction for Beginner ELLs is aligned with Common Core ELA Standards and the NYS ENL standards. Students are provided instruction in reading, speaking, writing and listening (four modalities) from the certified ENL teacher. To incorporate the Common Core State Standards for ELA content, the ENL teacher meets with ELA teachers in a Professional Learning Community and for common planning three days a week. Also, beginner ELLs are placed in integrated ENL classes for ELA and history. The skills taught during the stand alond period are reinforced by the ENL teacher in the content area courses.c. Intermediate ELLs (4-6 years) receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students are placed in one 45 minute class that meets daily in a self-contained setting. Students are programmed for small group instruction and are placed in homogeneous mixtures based on proficiency level. Instruction for ELLs is aligned to Common Core ELA Standards and NYS ENL Standards. Students are also placed in one 45 mintue integrated ENL ELA class where the skills taught during the stand alone period is reinforced by the ENL teacher.d. Long Term ELLs (6+ years) receive 180 minutes of ENL service per week. Students are programmed for one 45 minute class per day. Instruction is delivered in an integrated ENL class by a certified ENL teacher. Student are placed in homogeneous groupings based on proficiency level.e. Students who have placed out of ENL as per their NYSESLAT are integrated into general education classes. Student have access to support from the ENL teacher and testing accommodations for an additional two years 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students who are also identified as having special needs receive services from a special education teacher through collaboration and in push-in classes. Special educators work closely with the ENL teacher to ensure that the needs of ELL students with special needs continue to be met 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with IEPs are scheduled the same as every other mandated ENL student in an all-inclusive classroom. The ENL teacher works closely with the Special Education Department to ensure that ELLs with IEPs are able to achieve IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. FDNY provides a range of services for our ELL population. There is an extended learning program that provides Academic Intervention Services, with the additional assitance they may need in any of the content areas. This service is provided in English. In addition, we incorporate the Vision Common Core ESL Series to build fluency across all content areas. FDNY provides beginner ELLs with 1.5 hours a week of instruction in the EDGE program allowing ELLs to acquire knowledge in content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Depending on the needs assesment of the ELLs we have Curricula 21, a Pearson coach to engage in curricula and units modification and align assessment to fortify existing programming. Existing programming has been assessed and is working in order to address students' needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students receiving ENL services are afforded equal access to all student programs. Students receiving ENL are mandated to attend the Extended Learning Program after school and/or Saturdays. Students are also provided equal access to all elective courses. Additionally, students are encouraged to participate in school's extracurricular activities including sports teams and clubs. These programs include, but are not limited to: AIS, APEX, Online Music Courses, Career and Financial Management, Regents Prep Classes, Saturday School Clubs, Soccer, Football and Baseball. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use the SMART board in class. The addiitonal materials we use in class are the Visions ESL Series : Literacy, Language, Literature, Content (Apr 20, 2005) by Jill Korey O'Sullivan and Christy M. Newman. We use the Introductory, Basic, Intermediate and Advanced portions of the series. We also use apple laptops and Rosetta Stone Interactive English Language software. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Parents are supplemented with informational packets regarding student progress and programs available to their children. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All mandated services meet the emotional, social, academic-grade and age-level needs of all ELL students. In addition, students engage in check-in sessions with guidance counselors to determine how students are assimilating to the school's culture. The school engages in ongoing outreach programs to keep parents abreast of how students are handling the new transition and also to get support in terms of how students are doing at home. The school has also created a shared space 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  where students can go to engage in games and other social programs with their peers; shared space houses reading materials/literature in multiple languages and leveled texts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use the SMART board in class. We use tablets to support students with translation and auditory learners. We also use a variety of supplemental workbooks and graphic novels to suppor ELLs in ELA classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELL students have the opportunity to receive support during the school in Extended Learning situations (AIS). AIS instruction is delivered in small group and focuses on Regents preparation or any other academic needs of students in attendance on an individual basis 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered as an elective for all students at our high school. Spanish instruction is offered for levels 1-6. Instruction is provided by a native Spanish speaker who is bilingual in Spanish and English 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable to our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL provider attends professional development offered by the NYCDOE as well as other outside organizations. In addition, on-site, school-based professional development is offered to teachers twice a month (2:25p.m.-3:35p.m). Administrators, teachers, and support personnel deliver professional development on various instructional and social topics. PDs for ELL personnel also include psoted PDs offered by the DOE, and the UFT. Ell students transitioning from middle to high school receive instruction in Small Stand Alone and Push-In classes. The small setting increases the instructional intensity offered to incoming ELL students. Additionally, FDNY is a small school with a supportive staff. ELL students receive on going support from the ENL provider outsdie of the regular class time as needed. Students (and parents) also have access to language support from bilingual personnel including a bilingual school aide (foreign language teacher). The school offers guidance counselors ongoing training in ensuring that ELLs are transitioning smoothly. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The pedagogue responsible for ENL services provides at the beginning of each semester PDs intended to inform staff of the needs and progress of ELL students. The ENL service provider is also a part of a Professional Learning Community (English 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Department), Language Acquistion Committee and Grade Level Inquiry Team. Records are maintained in a locked file and updated as required by DOE request. Record of PD attendance is kept in the personal files of any teacher or staff who attend PDs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PTA meetings, ELL Parent Conferences (2 times per year), SPED parent meetings, Annual Reviews for SPED, Parent Messages and Personal Outreach; staff members proficient in student home language support parents with trasnlation. Translation units are usually utlilized to provide written communication. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Upon entrance into the school system, ELL parents are given the HLIS. If students are eligible for ENL services, parents are informed of instructional models for ENL. Parents of students already receiving ENL instruction are contacted by the school to establish communication and describe what services will continue to be delivered. Twice a year, FDNY hosts a parent-teacher night. Parents are able to conference with teachers and administrators during this time. Invitations for conferences are available for parents in native languages. Bilingual staff members are available to trasnlate during parent-teacher conferences. Additionally, all parents are also invited to attend school PTA meetings. To provide full disclosure of student performance, FDNY uses Datacation. Parents, teachers and students all have access to Datacation. Teachers post attendance, grades, assignments, and anecdotal accounts that are available to parents and students; the school also provides training for all parents to effectively navigate the system. The Parent Coordiantor has also set up NYC School Accounts for all students and parents. Bilingual staff members are available to trasnlate and communicate information to parents. Throughout the school year, teachers maintain ongoing communication with parents to ensure that students' needs are met. Bilingual staff members are available for translations at both informal/formal parent-teacher meetings and encouraged to attend all schoolwide activities including workshops and engagement activities. ELL parents are also strongly encouraged to join the school leadership team and actively participate in school decision making Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, James Anderson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19k502 School Name: FDNY High School for Fire and Life Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Data used to determine which parents need translation serices is taken from multiple sources, primarily the Parent Survey Form. The ESL teacher also has students fill out information cards within 30 days of the beginning of the school year or within the first week of newly arrived students througout the year. This information card asks students whether their parent or guardian speaks English, who the best contact person is at the home, and if their parent or guardian needs translation or interpretaion services. In addition, staff and teachers frequently, and actively engage students in conversation about their home life and parents/guardians in order to keep abreast of any changes to parent/guardian language needs 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Approximately 20% of our parents do not speak or read in English. The majority language spoken among parents is Spanish. Folowing that is French. Because the ELL population is relatively low at FDNY High School, the ESL teacher is able to alert teachers as to students whose parent or guardian speaks a language other than English at home and are in need of translation services. In addition, this information is kept on the studetns emergency information card, updated in ATS, and in Skedula noting the lanaguage spoken by the parents if it is exclusive. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. ENL Entitlement Letters, Home Language Informational Survey (HLIS), Language Assessment Battery Results (LAB-R), Parent Surveys, Program Selection Forms, Transitional Support Parent Notification Forms, Parent-2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Teacher Conference Announcements, NYS Testing Dates. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings at our school are conducted through a vairety of ways: Back to School night, parent-teacher conferences, curriculum nights and appointments made by parents or teachers. Back to school night is held at the beginning of the year and parent-teacher conferences are conducted throughout each semester. Appointments are made by parents and teachers as necessary. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  When a parent does not speak or read in Englsh they are provided with a translated copy of Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their home language. Signage that requires it is translation in French and Spanish and posted in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? ENL Entitlement Letters are sent home so that parents/guardians are aware of their student's entitlements regarding ENL within our school. Home Language Informational Survey (HLIS) are used to discover the home language of the student, his caregivers and their educational background. Language Assessment Battery Results (LAB-R) are used to determine the proficiency of a student in their home language so it can be determined how they will receive ENL entitlement. Parent Surveys are used to gauge the effectiveness of the school in relation to the parent/guardian. Program Selection Forms are feedback which helps the school determine how to program a student effectively. Transitional Support Parent Notification Forms are used to make parents aware of how their child will be taught when transitionijng out of ENL. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60 
