2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K503 School Name: PS 503: THE SCHOOL OF DISCOVERY Principal: NINA DEMOS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PS 503 332000010503 BEDS Code: Grades Served: K-5 School Address: 330 59 th Street School Number (DBN): 20K503 Phone Number: 718-439-5962 Fax: 718-439-0948 School Contact Person: Nina Demos Email Address: NDemos@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Nina Demos Lorraine Cogliando Maria Castillo Nina Demos Maria Castillo Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Helene Onserud District Information Geographical District: 20 Superintendent: Karina Costantino Superintendent’s Office Address: 415 89 th Street, Room 401, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Email Address: kcostan@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-759-4908 South Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: 718-630-1633 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: MauriciereDeGovia 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 Executive Director’s Email Address: Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Phone Number: 718-759-4862 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nina Demos Dina Barghouti Maria Castillo Esmeralda Dominguez Maria Castillo NA NA Kate Sullivan Jose Peralta Luz Garcia *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Grade 2 teacher Member/ 5th grade parent Member/2nd GradeParent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Katie Portelli EmilyRebaza Loubna Rhanmouni Jenny Zheng LucyRapozo Elizabeth Hallacy LorenaEscobar Diana Lee Patricia Estrella Giselle Ramoutar Member/1stGrade Parent Grade 2 teacher Member/K parent Member/5th grade parent Grade 3 Teacher Member/ 5th grade Teacher Grade 1 parent Member/ 2nd grade Teacher Grade 1 parent Grade 4 teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview The school Mission Statement is the driving force behind all of our academic, social and emotional goals. PS 503, The School for Discovery and Exploration, is a safe place where all members of our diverse community learn side by side with one another. Habits of Mind are taught, practiced, valued, and infused into our culture. It is our mission to welcome and celebrate all peoples and to nurture them to be more reflective, cooperative and kind-hearted. It is our expectation that all PS 503 members – staff, families, and students – will grow academically and gain the skills to help social, environmental, economic and political world problems. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Context: PS 503 is a K-5 co-located elementary school serving 1100 students. When PS 503 began in 2006 enrollment was 750 students. The school community has grown by 360 students in the last 10 years. This is a net gain of 40 students per year. 32% of PS 503’s students live in temporary housing. Due to the transient nature of families living in temporary housing we have an average change of 150 students each year being discharged and admitted. So although the net gain is 40 students, it is a much higher percentage of change. PS 503 is a Title 1 school with 97% of students receiving free and reduced price lunch. PS 503 is located in an immigrant community. PS 503 has 56% identified ELLs representing various Chinese dialects, Spanish and Arabic. Although 56% of students are identified ELLs our data shows that an even larger number speak a language other than English at home, since 80% of families receive their communications home in a language other than English. The student population is comprised primarily of first generation Americans, but also includes immigrant students who are new arrivals from Mexico, Dominican Republic, Central America, Yemen, and China. These students arrive to the United States in grades K-5. In order to service and support the ELL community PS 503 implements what we call the “triad” model. We have one ENL licensed teacher for every 2 classrooms. This teacher provides push-in ENL services as she/he works in collaboration with the classroom teacher to co-plan, and use the various co-teaching models to differentiate content. The co-teaching model of instruction that exists throughout the school exemplifies the impact that collaboration has on teaching and learning. Our teachers look to their colleagues for support on their teaching and use video-taping to share lessons and get feedback. Teachers open their classrooms to grade, school and city wide colleagues. PS 503 supports a wide range of learners by providing various special education settings and services in the general education setting, through SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Services), ICT (Integrated collaborative teaching) and in a self contained special education program. We currently have 43 classes, including 4 special 12:1:1 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  classes (12 students in each serving grades K-5). We have a teaching staff of 103 teachers, including a math co-teacher on each grade who supports teachers in planning and preparing for units of study and supports students through direct small group and whole class instruction. Unique to our school: Professional Development: ● Identified as Learning Partners Host School for the structures and supports we have in place to ensure collaboration and distributed leadership.  Accepted into the D20/ UFT ENL Initiative for innovative work regarding sharing best practice in ENL and  Special Education methods with teacher teams across the school. Selected as a Demonstration school by the Office of Special Education. Through PS 503’s work with the Teacher’s College Inclusive Classroom Project (TCICP), focused on building the content knowledge of Para-professionals and their ability to respond to the social-emotional needs of their students, PS 503 was selected to showcase and share best practices in special education.  Creation of content liaison teams to ensure vertical alignment. Cross grade “liaison” teams ensure vertical alignment of curriculum by acting as think tanks, developing teacher practice in specific content areas (math, literacy, social studies) and providing feedback and suggestions to administration regarding curriculum modification, assessment policy, student feedback. In addition the “grade level liaison” team provides feedback, asks questions and engages in a problem-solving dialogue about all matters related to school operations. Student Clubs/ Teams and Programs for Enrichment  Award winning National Chess Team - Sunset Nights  Cheer-leading Team to support girls with social emotional needs  Girls on the Run - yearly participation in a girls running program designed to promote positive self image and self care skills for girls. Student Chorus Student School Ambassadors   Partnerships with Specialized organizations to support integrated curriculum and the Arts through in school residencies Sunset Spark Lego Robotics  Chess in the Schools   Wildlife Naturalist Lenny  Family Involvement: o Parents as Arts Partners - promoting music and the arts through joint performances with students and parents o New Victory Theater - Bring Your Family to the Theater - free and low cost tickets to the theater 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  o Farms for City Kids - 5th grade students spend 1 week at a working farm in Vermont, learning about ecology, science & math and promoting student independence through hands on learning. o FaceLab - Parent led Lego Robotics Program Strategic Collaborations: Through the School Community Grant Initiative (SCGI) PS 503 is in a strategic collaboration with Center for Family Life (CFL) and NYU/Lutheran Medical Center. The grant has two main objectives. The first goal of the grant is to work in partnership with CFL to ensure that there is curricular alignment between the school day and after school programming, creating a “seamless day”. PS 503 staff will provide professional development in the CCLS, in strategies and structures for HW help, and arts teachers from PS 503 will work in direct collaboration with arts specialists from CFL after school to coordinate and align curriculum and themes. The second goal of the grant is to work in collaboration with CFL and NYU/Lutheran to provide wrap-around servicing: including access to social work referrals, counseling, and after school support to 10 high needs families identified based on a pattern of chronic absenteeism. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations: PS 503 is a Magnet school known for its success in meeting the needs of children with learning disabilities and therefore a number of students who enroll with us through our magnet program are children with Individual Education Plans. Our students in temporary housing also receive additional social emotional supports through at-risk servicing from the clinical team and priority inclusion in PS 503’s after school enrichment clubs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress Framework for Great Schools: According to the 2016-2017 Learning Environment Survey (LES) PS 503 scored above the average range in the area of trust. This trust encompasses connection between and among the staff, administration, families and the community. Area of Focus: According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey (LES) PS 503 scored below the average range in the area of rigorous instruction. In order to bolster rigor, PS 503 has an instructional focus this year on “integrated curriculum”. Integrated curriculum is an approach designed to support students, particularly ELLs, in applying the skills, concepts, learning behaviors and vocabulary they learn in one content area to other content areas. We have refined this focus to include emphasis on language acquisition and methods in ENL/SPED instruction. We will implement a balanced language curriculum to explicitly teach the structures of language, thus supporting ELLs further. This year we plan to continue our focus while building towards grade-wide and school wide coherence with academic rigor and co-teaching models. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K503 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1072 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 45 42 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.8% % Reduced Lunch 59.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 73.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 2% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 67% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 115 114 7 94.8% 2.3% 22.0% 0.6% 20.7% 0.5% 4 4% 6.7 43.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No N/A YSH N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 ELA test scores indicate a need to continue to focus on the SWD sub group. SWD will be the target sub group during continuous cycles of teacher led inquiry. The focus of these conversations needs to become more refined to give support to teachers who are working with students from the SWD sub-group with various challenges and to provide specific strategies in SPED instruction.  In the vast majority of classrooms, teacher pedagogy demonstrates a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best and teacher practice is engaging, rigorous, and aligned to the curriculum. Teaching strategies provide multiple entry points and supports into the curriculum so that all learners are engaged. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Building on the strength of the curriculum in each subject area we need to move toward integrating curriculum so that non-traditional learners are leveraging their prior content knowledge and learning behaviors when learning new content. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, we will increase the percentage of students with disabilities in grades 3, 4 and 5 meeting proficiency from 3% - 5% as measured by the State ELA exam. We will use inquiry to target this problem of practice by specifically investigating discrepancies in literacy assessments. Opportunities for project based learning that supports the cognitive development of this sub-group will be provided. A continued focus on integrated content curriculum will be maintained to support transfer of knowledge across subjects and to help students leverage strengths. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Every teacher will participate in a yearlong inquiry where student reading & writing work is evaluated using the model of assess, teach, assess. Teachers will engage in cross grade inquiry teams based on the needs of their students and will focus on investigating discrepancies in literacy assessments. The teams will be facilitated by teacher leaders Professional development in methods in ENL and SPED will be infused into the inquiry. Students chosen from the SWD and ENL sub-groups. High leverage students selected: those whose reading level and/or state test scores placed them in the 1.8 - 2.0 or 2.8 - 3.0 range. All staff will use varied co-teaching models to target instruction in Reading and Writing, including access to a flex grouping structure to support rigor by ensuring that students are in the least restrictive environment. All Students All staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Professional development in positive behavioral supports, (PBS), accessing and using SESIS and creating quality IEPs in order to create the conditions necessary for academic success. Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers Paraprof- fessionals Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Facilitators - teachers from the ENL/SPED support team. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Participants - special education, general education, cluster and ENL teachers. Admin will provide feedback and logistical and technical support. Classroom teachers; ENL teachers, teacher leaders (peer collaborative teachers and model teachers), paraprofessionals, related service providers. Admin will support through observation feedback, programming, professional development, and budgeting. Clinical team, staff developers from the Teachers College Inclusive Classroom 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Teachers will have access to a multi-disciplinary team (RTI liaisons) through submission of a form that expresses their concerns for an individual student. The RTI liaison team will triage these concerns and invite teachers to weekly case management meetings where they can receive suggestions and support for targeting the needs of the student and create a plan. Periodic review is a component of the structure. Students from ENL/SPED sub-group All teachers PS 503 will host monthly workshops following family Friday to explore the reporting tools that the school uses in each content area, to ensure that families are aware of the assessment criteria and to familiarize them with strategies they can use at home to support their children. All Staff All families Students from lowest ⅓ Sept 2018-June 2019 Project, teacher leaders (model teachers and peer collaborative teachers), admin. RTI liaisons from each grade (composed of expertise in special education and ENL instruction), clinical team members, teacher leaders (model teachers and peer collaborative teachers), admin. Admin, teachers who serve as as “family liaisons” on each grade, content liaisons (teachers from each grade who specialize in math, literacy, social studies - based on the content selected as the focus of the workshop) Admin Tech team Nov 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Creation of Drive curriculum resources & digital data tracking to determine when and how to modify curriculum. Professional development in technology use. All teachers June 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2018, families will be provided meaningful opportunities to participate in and support with the academic development of their children. Monthly workshops designed to increase understanding of our student progress letter in reading writing and math will be attended by 12% of families (100 families per workshop). This work will result in greater usage of the progress letters by families and understanding of the next steps that can be taken at home to support students. This will be evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of positive responses to, “My child’s school has high expectations for my child and communicates to me and my child what we need to do to prepare my child for college and career readiness” on the LES survey. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for TC programming; in-house teacher leaders, common planning time; per session for the ESL/SPED support team and RTI liaisons, per diem coverage to allow teachers to attend Professional Development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored through TC Assessment Pro and pre/post unit tests; periodic benchmark assessments; RTI progress monitoring; looking at differentiated lesson plans. The data for students with disabilities will be analyzed to see if students met their reading level progression benchmarks for February. This is a leading indicator of their 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  likelihood of meeting standard on the ELA exam since reading level and performance level on the exams are correlated. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC Running Record Assessments; RTI Student SMART Goals Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The first line of our mission statement relates to providing a safe environment for our students to learn. We understand that if a child’s social and emotional needs are not met, he/she will not live up to their potential academically. As a result, PS 503 has established partnerships with a variety of organizations to support our students and families: TCICP, The Center for Family Life, NYU Lutheran Medical and Mental Health Services. In addition, our in-house staff – guidance counselors, social worker and school psychologist – run groups for students and families such as Parenting Journey and Grief Support Group for students who have immediate family members who have deceased. These structures are primarily focused on direct servicing of students and families. In order to build capacity as a community, so that we can insure that the conditions necessary for rigorous instruction are present in every classroom, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  we will focus most of our supports this year on building teacher capacity. We will explore various social emotional curricula and move toward the pilot implementation of a whole school program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the number of lunchtime incidents as reported in the lunchtime incident log, OORS, and through teacher and family concerns shared with admin will decrease by 5 %. As a result of the implementation of the Playworks Recess Curricula, the school wide norming of behavioral expectations for hallways, the ongoing exploration of possible school-wide social emotional/ community building/ behavior management programs for pilot adoption in 2018-2019, and ongoing professional development through “Topic PDs” on positive behavior interventions (class community and outliers) , a more positive school climate will exist, resulting in the # of teachers responding positively to the question, order and discipline are maintained at my school will increase from 85% to 88% on the LES. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development in positive behavioral supports, (PBS), accessing and using SESIS and creating quality IEPs. Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Paraprof- fessionals Teachers will have access to a multi-disciplinary team (RTI liaisons) through submission of a form that expresses their concerns for an individual student. The RTI liaison team will triage these concerns and invite teachers to weekly case management meetings where they can receive suggestions and support for targeting the needs of the student and create a plan. Periodic review is a component of the structure. Zones of Regulation After-school Club Student Clubs/ Teams and Programs for Enrichment that allow students positive outlets to explore their interests and talents and that serve as sources of positive motivation for students to regulate their emotions and give their personal best to work in the classroom. - Playworks Recess program Students from lowest ⅓ Students from ESL/SPED sub-group All teachers Students with behavioral challenges, particularly those with self regulation goals on their IEPs. All students - priority to students in temporary housing and students in the SWD sub-group. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Clinical team, staff developers from the Teachers College Inclusive Classroom Project, teacher leaders (model teachers and peer RTI liaisons from each grade (composed of expertise in special education and ESL instruction), clinical team members, teacher leaders (model teachers and peer collaborative teachers), admin. Guidance counselor, special education teachers and crisis par-professionals, admin. Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin, teacher of after school clubs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  -Award winning National Chess Team - Sunset Nights -Cheer-leading Team to support girls with social emotional needs -Girls on the Run - yearly participation in a girls running program designed to promote positive self image and self care skills for girls. -Student Chorus -Student School Ambassadors - Chess in the Schools -Capulli Mexican Dance -Sunset Spark Lego Robotics 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host monthly Coffee with the Principal meetings to update families on the strategies and approaches we will use as a school, including Zones of regulation and Playworks recess program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session and per diem coverage for teacher leaders and members of the clinical team to plan and facilitate professional development and to provide case management support to teachers. Supplies, curriculum materials and per session to support enrichment opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The admin & clinical team will analyze the number of cases reported in the lunchtime incident & family communication logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  lunchroom incident log and family communication log Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X x X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 ELA test scores indicate a discrepancy between student Independent Reading Levels and test scores. Further examination shows discrepancies between Writing on Demand benchmark scores and Independent Reading Level Benchmarks as collected in school based student data sheets. Through repeated practice participating in periodic data meetings, teachers understand school level, grade level and class level data, and are versed in using data to make instructional decisions. Teacher strength and facility with understanding data will be leveraged to select target inquiry students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, every teacher will have participated in an inquiry in which student reading & writing work is evaluated using the model of assess.teach.assess. Teachers will engage in grade level or cross-grade inquiry teams based on the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27 needs of their students as related to a problem of practice. Problems of practice will be identified where discrepancies exist between Independent Reading Levels, Informational Writing on Demand scores, and ELA State exam scores. The teams will be facilitated by grade level teacher leaders and administrators. This inquiry will result in 90% of the selected inquiry students making 1-years growth (maintaining benchmark in IRLs and test scores) and 10% of inquiry students increasing their reading benchmark/ ELA State exam score (either from level 1 to level 2 or from level 2 to level 3) as per the June 2018 MOSL local measures independent reading levels and 2018 State ELA exam.. AND/OR 10% of inquiry students will increase test scores to match IRLs. The PS 503 Balanced language curriculum will be implemented to improve student writing and thus diminish discrepancies. Teachers will select inquiry students from the ENL and SPED sub groups. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Every teacher will participate in a yearlong inquiry where student reading & writing work is evaluated using the model of assess, teach, assess. Teachers will engage in cross grade inquiry teams based on the needs of their students and will focus on investigating discrepancies in literacy assessments. The teams will be facilitated by teacher leaders Professional development in methods in ENL and SPED will be infused into the inquiry. Teachers will have access to a multi-disciplinary team (RTI liaisons) through submission of a form that expresses their concerns for an individual student. The RTI liaison team will triage these concerns and invite teachers to weekly case management meetings where they can receive suggestions and support for targeting the needs of the student and create a plan. Periodic review is a component of the structure. Sept 2018 -June 2019 Sept 2018- June 2019 Students chosen from the SWD and ENL sub-groups. High leverage students were selected: those whose reading level and/or state test scores placed them in the 1.8 - 2.0 or 2.8 - 3.0 range. Students from lowest ⅓ Students from ESL/SPED sub-group All teachers Teachers apply for and are accepted to participate in staff development provided by Metamorphosis Learning Communities (math & science), Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (literacy & social studies), and PS 503 teacher leaders (positive behavioral supports, word work, SESIS, quality IEPs, methods in ENL/SPED. The professional development that teachers participate in is aligned to their professional goals and the specific learning needs/ focus for their inquiry student. Teachers Oct 2018 - June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Facilitators - teachers from the ESL/SPED support team. Participants - special education, general education, cluster and ESL teachers. Admin will provide feedback and logistical and technical support. RTI liaisons from each grade (composed of expertise in special education and ENL instruction), clinical team members, teacher leaders (model teachers and peer collaborative teachers), admin. Metamorphosis & TCRWP staff developers, PS 503 teacher leaders (model and peer collaborative teachers), admin. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Individual student literacy goals created for each student. All teachers All students Oct. 2018-June 2019 Teacher leaders, admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Updates on students' progress via the inquiry process will be shared with families during interim conversations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session and per diem to support teacher leaders in planning and facilitating inquiry. Funds to pay for collaborations with professional development organizations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Reading level progression benchmarks for February 2018 will be analyzed for each student selected for the inquiry in order to determine progress toward the target goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TC running record formal assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All teachers at PS 503 recognize that growth and learning are on-going processes and that the only way we will improve as teachers is through setting goals for ourselves and developing plans for reaching those goals. Professional goal setting is a structure that has been in place at PS 503 for the past 5 years. Teacher strength in this area will be leveraged to support effective collaboration and the intentional selection of co-teaching models that match teacher strength and student need. We will expand our goal setting from the academic realm to the social emotional and will practice open communication and being receptive to feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  In order to provide the highest quality, most seamless and targeted instruction possible for students, we will work on improving collaboration amongst staff, (and in particular between classroom and cluster teachers, and Gen Ed, ELL and Sped teachers working across two classrooms (triad model)). To improve collaboration we will pursue a renewed investment in the “triad model”. PD to support - Staff will receive professional development on inter-personal dynamics, and will develop and revise norms for interaction/ communication. Professional development on the various co-teaching models will be given. School wide professional development will always be presented through the interactive format of the co-teaching models. Teacher leaders on each grade will provide classroom based lab sites that serve to highlight both content, and the co-teaching models. Admin support -Administration and teacher leaders will model collaboration and co-teaching during the joint planning and facilitation of inquiry. Administration will support collaboration through the use of structures such as observing all of the teachers in a triad, and creating set office hours as an invitation for staff to share feelings, ideas and concerns, and to brainstorm solutions to interpersonal challenges. - These measures will lead to greater and deeper collaboration, resulting in the # of teachers responding positively to the questions:   “Teachers in my school trust each other” from 84% to 87% “At my school, it's OK to discuss feelings, worries, and frustrations with the principal/school leader” from 73% to 76% 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Admin team provides professional development on inter-personal dynamics and implements support structures throughout the year (such as office hours and triad check ins) to ensure that there are available contexts for ongoing problem solving and resolution. The administrative team has divided the organization sheet and chosen specific teachers to observe. Administrators will observe the entire triad (all teachers who collaborate together) in order to facilitate positive relationships and the intentional selection of co-teaching models. All untenured teacher will receive a minimum of 6 observations to ensure additional support. Teachers use the admin schedule to sign up for observation debriefs in order to ensure that observations are adequately paced to give teachers enough time to implement feedback in instructional practice. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals All Advance eligible teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers will receive non-evaluative feedback from the admin team after instructional walk-throughs. Teachers will receive feedback in the form of email communication pinpointing trends on the grade and asking teachers to reflect on next steps in their practice All Advance eligible teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teacher leaders on each grade will provide classroom based lab-sites that serve to highlight both the content being taught and the co-teaching models. All Teachers Oct 2018 - June 2019 Teacher leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Via the school leadership team, we will develop a communication strategy to show how collaboration and team teaching impact student outcomes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leader salaries and coverage so that teacher leaders both have labsite classrooms and are available to coach in their colleagues classrooms. Partnerships with professional development organizations who provide training to staff. Per session and per diem to make these opportunities a reality. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Increase in targeted instruction matching student needs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Responses on the 2018 LES survey results will indicate growth from 84% - 87% to the statement: teachers at my school trust each other. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over 95% of our students live at poverty level. As a result, families are living daily with stresses that have a major impact upon their children’s performance in school. Based on quantitative data collected during family events at school, and qualitative data collected from family liaisons, CBO partners, and our two Parent Coordinators, we concluded that there was a need to provide our families with less traditional, and more empowering opportunities to be involved in their children’s education. We have done this by sponsoring advocacy efforts such as participatory budgeting through which parents have organized voting campaigns resulting in upgrades to school facilities and technology. These efforts have helped parents engage, build confidence and capacity, and trust with the school community. Now that parents are actively involved it is time to leverage that involvement into a renewed focus on supporting their children academically and using the family communication tools we have in place not just to have awareness of their child’s level, but to understand the relationship between performance and progress and to support with next steps for the child. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As we continue to focus on increasing family involvement and parent participation, we will work at creating opportunities for families to join our school community as facilitators, presenters and volunteers. By June 2018, families will have had various opportunities to volunteer and support their children in our school community. Teachers, the Parent Coordinator Team and administrators will promote the opportunities through letters home, sign up sheets, School Leadership Meetings Opportunities for Increased Family Engagement through Volunteer Work:  Parents as co-facilitators at Parent Workshops  Parents as presenters in their children’s classrooms ( Hispanic Heritage Month, Culture Day, Career Day, to share family traditions, (journey to America, sharing favorite family recipes) as a way to build cross cultural awareness.  Parents as presenters / experts at PTA Meetings and School Leadership Meetings to share school structures and ways families can support families. FaceLab STEAM Program - facilitators of class level Lego Robotics instruction   Participation in Office of Adult and Continuing Education school based Programs This will be measured by feedback surveys, increased number of parent facilitators at parent workshops, PTA Meetings, School Leadership Team Meetings and increased parent volunteers in classrooms to support their children during Family Fridays (School Spirit Days). As a result of this work, the percentage of families responding positively to the LES question “Since the beginning of the school year, I have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support my child’s school” increasing from 63% to 66%. Key personnel include the administrative team, the teacher lead "family liaisons" and parent coordinators. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of family liaison team consisting of parent coordinators, teachers, social workers and admin to share best practices in the area of family involvement. Teachers will send home reading, writing and math progress letters quarterly in native language. These letters will inform parents of where their children are, what their end of the year goals and benchmarks are, and where their children are in relationship to grade level standards. Families will be invited to share expertise, and build their capacity while volunteering &facilitating in the school community. Opportunities will be offered/ publicized through all of the school based channels for family involvement - PC team, family liaisons, SLT, PTA. Family events such as Family Friday, Coffee with the Principal, PTA meetings, Assemblies, Family Workshops will be used as contexts for modeling involvement and offering additional opportunities. Outreach to families that are struggling to encourage participation in CFL family counseling sessions; activities through The Promise Center; cycles with the school social worker in Parenting Journey. Families Teachers Families Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin Sept 2018- June 2019 Admin Teachers Families Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Admin Families with chronic absenteeism and those who have requested additional support. Families with chronic absenteeism and those who have Sept 2018 - June 2019 Clinical Team Admin Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Through the School Community Grant Initiative (SCGI) PS 503 is in a strategic collaboration with Center for Family Life (CFL) and NYU/Lutheran Medical Center. The goal of the grant is to work in collaboration with CFL and NYU/Lutheran to provide wrap-around servicing: including access to social work referrals, counseling, and after school support to 10 high needs families identified based on a pattern of chronic absenteeism. PS 503 will host monthly workshops following family Friday to explore the progress letters that the school uses in each content area, to ensure that families are aware of the assessment criteria and to familiarize them with strategies they can use at home to support their children. Creation of family liaison team consisting of parent coordinators, teachers, social workers and admin to share best practices in the area of family involvement. requested additional support All students All families All students All families Sept 2018 - June 2019 Nov 2018 - June 2019 SCGI school based coordinator Director CFL Beacon Program Admin team Admin, teachers who serve as as “family liaisons” on each grade, content liaisons (teachers from each grade who specialize in math, literacy, social studies - based on the content selected as the focus of the workshop) Admin teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept 2018 - June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are a community school partnering with SCO - Center for Family Life. We also partner with NYU/ Lutheran for health and mental health services. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Two Parent coordinators representing the major languages and ethnicities of the student population, partnerships with CBOs, local organizations and officials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Increase in number and variety of opportunities for families to volunteer/ present/ facilitate in the school community Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All level one and two students Mathematics All level one and two students Science All level one and two students Social Studies All level one and two students Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● One on one conferring ● During the school day ● Small group strategy lessons ● Before and after school ● One on one conferring ● During the school day ● Small group strategy lessons ● Before and after school ● One on one conferring ● During the school day ● Small group strategy lessons ● Before and after school ● One on one conferring ● During the school day ● Small group strategy lessons ● Before and after school ● Guided reading ● Shared reading ● Close reading ● RTI cycle ● Performance tasks ● Guided mental math minilessons ● Matamorphosis Learning Communities Consultant ● Shared reading ● Guided reading ● Informational text features ● Close reading ● Project-based learning ● Shared reading ● Guided reading ● Informational text features ● Close reading 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  All level one and two students At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Project-based learning ● Observe ● Individual ● Behavior Modification Plans ● Group ● Parent engagement ● Referral to outside services ● During the school day ● After school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 357 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Enrichment clubs, additional academic support, collaboration with CBOs providing social work services and materials resources. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  m/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are recruited through mentoring partnerships with Teacher’s College and Hunter college. ENL teachers are given preference and are placed in supportive co-teaching relationships through the “triad” model. They are observed and given feedback a minimum 6 times a year through Advance. All new teachers are part of a cohort that meets periodically throughout the year with mentors and staff developers to focus on components of the balanced math and literacy curriculum. All new teachers are assigned mentors. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff participates in ongoing PD cycles with our professional development partners: Metamorphosis, TCRWP, TCICP. In addition, all staff participates in content institutes provided by PS 503 lead teachers and coaches. Staff also participates in coaching cycles and inquiry cycles based on analysis of student work. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We have a comprehensive intake program. During registration students are given a welcome packet to our school. It includes a DVD that introduces families to the Kindergarten teachers, emergent story books and our phonics program. Families attend orientation all throughout the summer to build community with other families and with teachers. We have classroom paras on Kindergarten to support transition and class size. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers begin making decisions for the 2018-2019 school year during grade level “June planning”. Teachers reflect on students that made one year’s growth, and those that didn’t. They review the results of piloted curriculum and methods and make decisions about 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X n/a X X Column B Section Reference(s) 14, 17, 19, 21 11 n/a 11 11, 14, 17 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 982,776 16,979 n/a 174,073 77,646 0 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 6, 815, 095 X 11, 14, 17, 19, 21 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 503, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 503 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 503, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52 ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction by increasing student attendance rates through the implementation of Success Mentors. The Health & Wellness program also brought vision screening to our school and supplied 200 students with glasses needed for reading. We have also opened adult education classes to teach families English so that families are better able to support their children at home with school work. The community school model has allowed us to host summer school at our site and share the existing permit and school based health center staff with our CBO as they host summer camp. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Increased collaboration between PS 503 teachers employed by CFL to provide ELT during after school programming resulting in an increase in student work habits and program coherence between after school and instructional day. the ultimate goal would be a “seamless day”. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Increases in all of the above areas create the necessary conditions for learning and increase in # of students reading on grade level - in particular ELLs and students with special needs. After school programming will present opportunities for project based learning and learning through the arts in order to promote student engagement. Our implementation of success mentoring program starting this year. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership Center for Family Life Target Population Students with less than 90% attendance Success Mentoring By June 2019, Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for students who were chronically absent the in 2017-2018 resulting in 80% of the targeted students missing fewer days than the previous year. By June 2019, English Classes will have been offered Center for Family Life Office of Adult Education Families who speak a home language other than English Adult English classes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Center for Family Life All students from PS 503 and PS 506 enrolled in after school, as well as others from the school community After school, summer camp and Neighborhood Center evening, weekend and summer programs Center for Family Life NYU/ Lutheran school based health Physical and Mental health services Health and Dental clinics on site. mental health and family counseling services on and off-site. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment continuously to 60 -90 participants For the school year 2018-2019 CFL will be including 3 additional groups during after school bringing up the program total to 280 participants. This will assure parents that their children are receiving sound homework assistance and developmentally appropriate arts and fitness activities. Provided that we continue to receive funding from OCS, the CBO could also continue to offer wrap around services for the adult education classes including food and childcare for 60 children To assure a more seamless coordination of services between the schools and the organizations involved Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. CBO Center for Family Life’s (CFL) array of services include after school, summer day camp and Neighborhood Center evening, Saturday and summer programs; family counseling, employment services and a single stop with legal, financial counseling and benefit services, as well as an emergency food pantry. CFL also has a partnership with the Public Theatre, with theatre classes offered to parents, teens and children during evenings and an opportunity to audition for a summer Shakespeare play at the end of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  As a community school we partner with the Office of Adult Continuing education to provide needed TESOL classes to schools’ parents. CFL provides childcare, including homework help led by teachers. Dinner is also offered to parents taking the classes and their children. Other community partners include NYU Lutheran for health and mental health services, the Healing Center for counseling related to domestic violence and Grandma’s Love, Blessing in a backpack for emergency food. 2. Three focus areas for the next year include: a) to bring up attendance more systematically than we were able to during our first year. CFL is providing funding for two teachers in PS 506 and two teachers and a para in PS 503 to be success mentors every morning for an hour each. b) to bring additional support to lunch/recess periods. A CFL staff is covering all lunch/recess periods for both schools two days a week. c) to continue integrating the school and CBO staffing working during and after the school day to create a seamless school community day and evening that includes meeting the educational needs of students and their parents as well as providing enrichment activities. Three teachers are working to monitor homework help during after school and one of the teachers will be doing guided reading with selected students from both schools during after school. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  4. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. This campus has a rich and expansive Expanded Learning Time (2:15 to 9 PM every day and 6 hours on Saturday as well as over six weeks on the summer) that includes developmentally appropriate educational fitness, art based, social emotional activities for children and for parents. In what relates to Mental Health and Family Counseling, students are referred, as needed, to an array of services provided by school social workers and psychologist as well as mental health professionals from other organizations including the Center for Family Life Beacon Preventive, NYU Lutheran mental health services and the Healing Center for victims of domestic violence. Family engagement will be multi-faceted, including collaboration with adult education, parent academic through STEM initiative, in school and after school workshops, monthly open classroom visits and advocacy. Each month, parents are invited to visit their child’s class and participate in an activity. Following the open classroom visits, we facilitate workshops on a variety of topics. During this time, parents have an opportunity to provide feedback and share ideas for future workshops and meetings. Based on feedback from our Community Schools Forum and our parent attendance, these open class visits and workshops are very popular with our families. We have scheduled weekly attendance meetings which all Success mentors attend including CBO partners. We are eagerly awaiting access to the New Visions Data Sorter. Both Principals and CSD meet weekly to strategize next steps, coordinate and reflect on existing services. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. CBO Center for Family Life’s array of services include after school, summer day camp and Neighborhood evening, Saturday and summer programs; family counseling, employment services and a single stop with legal, financial counseling and benefit services, as well as an emergency food pantry. Other community partners include NYU Lutheran for health and mental health services, the Healing Center for counseling related to domestic violence and Grandma’s Love, Blessing in a backpack for emergency food. We partner with the Office of Adult Continuing education to provide needed TESOL classes to schools’ parents. We also have partnerships with the Public Theatre, with theatre classes during evenings and with Lincoln Center Boro Linc. Three focus areas for the next year include: a) to bring up attendance more systematically than we were able to during our first year as a DOE Community School. b) to bring additional support to lunch/recess periods. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  c) to continue integrating the school and CBO staffing working during and after the school day to create a seamless school community day and evening that includes meeting the educational needs of students and their parents as well as providing enrichment activities. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. access to and training with the data sorter Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ongoing Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: PROGRAM 1: AFTER SCHOOL THEME BASED HANDS-ON LANGUAGE IMMERSION PROGRAM FOR ELLS Grades K-5: This after-school program is designed to enhance our ELL students’ oral language ability and vocabulary development. Our goal is to enhance their receptive language that will transfer to their productive language. The intent is to improve their overall literacy abilities in order to improve their specific reading and writing skills. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, class assessments, and past ELA tests, indicate that our students struggle with writing. While they have structure in place, they do not support their ideas with evidence from their readings or from personal experience. Our theme-based hands-on language immersion program will allow students to explore all aspects of language, reading, writing, listening and speaking while focusing on different aspects of one topic. Hands-on immersion in a topic will expand the students’ understanding of the topic as well as broaden their vocabulary base. Classes will take place 1 day a week, Wednesday through Friday, from 2:30 – 4:30, on a rotating cycle of 6 weeks per cycle, beginning October 19th through June 16th. Students will meet in groups of 20 students with ESL certified teachers and content area teachers. The two teachers will co-teach portions of the lessons and will work separately with small groups in order to target specific areas of instruction according to the level and focus of the students, such as their receptive language (listening and reading) or productive language (speaking and writing). This model will support small group instruction in conjunction with whole group discussion. Students will also be provided with strategies for communicating in various situations and methods of articulating their feelings and needs. Heterogeneous grouping of students with 1-3 years of service and those with 4-6 years of service will allow students the opportunity to engage with peers of varying abilities and serve as models. Students will be immersed in all areas of literacy and language acquisition around specific themes, with small group instruction provided according to student needs and interest. Instruction and exploration will be through the use of fiction, non-fiction texts, such as Scholastic non-fiction series, and related exploratory materials. Music will be incorporated to provide fluency support and exposure to rhyme and cadence. Instruction will be in English with ESL supports, however non-English speakers will be additionally supported by our bilingual staff. Instruction will include critical thinking strategies in conjunction with writing and oral presentation, such as writing chess notations and presenting explanations of their strategies. PROGRAM 2: SATURDAY ACADEMY : This program is designed for students in grades 3 – 5. It will run on Saturdays from January through April. It will utilize thematic, holistic and active learning strategies integrated into curriculum areas in order to support all four domains 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information (reading, writing, listening, speaking). Instruction will include opportunities to support individual reading needs. Interactive read alouds will provide opportunities to promote oral language and enhance discussion abilities, as well as expanding students’ vocabulary. The use of iReady software will assist in generating baselines for assessment and a means of monitoring growth. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to provide successful instruction to the students the ESL teachers providing the direct instruction will receive professional development in the effective use of ESL approaches. This funding source will be used to provide substitute coverage to enable the 29 ESL teachers to attend the professional development. Professional development topics will include but not be limited to “Structures for building Oral and Written Content-Specific Language and Vocabulary” presented by staff developers like Amanda Hartman & Celena Larkey of Teachers College, Columbia University. These staff developers have many years of experience teaching ELLs and supporting teachers of ELLs. This PD will be a series of 4 sessions, 90 minutes in duration, to take place over the course of the school year. An intensive summer institute focused on “Supporting ELLs with Language Acquisition”, presented by ESL teachers and literacy coaches, takes place each July (July 18 -20, 2016 and projected July 10-13, 2017). In addition, teachers will attend ‘calendar days’ professional development offered through the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, such as “Differentiating for ELLs”. The aforementioned professional development sessions are in addition to on-going ESL professional development, such as “Methods in ESL”, provided throughout the school year as described in the school's Language Allocation Policy. The ESL teachers providing the in-house professional development will present strategies and practices learned through their participation in an ELL Initiative sponsored by the UFT Teachers Center during the previous school year, as well as TCRWP PD for ELL teachers. All strategies presented are designed for immediate implementation in the classroom arena and the professional development structure provides for ongoing assessment of that implementation and the progress of the students. The teachers who present professional development also attend professional development in various areas of instruction. Teachers will present work within their specific area of expertise. All attendance sheets will be kept on file, as well as agendas and artifacts from each session. In addition, agendas, sign-up forms and materials are located on the in-house Google Drive allowing teachers access to a variety of materials and information. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PARENT WORKSHOPS: In order for the parents of our English Language Learner students to provide support to their children we need to provide instruction and support to them. We provide parent workshops, 45 minutes in duration, during the school day, at least once a month during the school year. Workshops take place from 9:00 – 10:00 on Fridays. Topics will include, but not be limited to, How to Support English Language Learners at [various] Reading Levels, How to Support English Language Learners with Math, and How Support English Language Learners with Writing Proficiency. Coaches, teachers, according to area of specialty, and administrators will present the workshops with the assistance of the Parent Coordinator and Parent Liaison. Parents will be invited to the workshops according to the specific level of their children. Materials designed to support the parents in supporting their children will be provided where applicable. Parents will be notified by letters sent home, flyers, posters placed at all entrances and phone calls home via the school messaging system. All communication will be in multiple languages as necessary. Simultaneous translation will be provided during all workshops. All notifications, agendas and sign-in sheets will be kept on file. PARENT COMPONENT OF SATURDAY ACADEMY: In order to support the families of our English Language Learners, we offer a program for families of ELLs who attend Saturday Academy. This program consists of 2 1-hour sessions each Saturday while their child attends Saturday Academy--1 workshop that supports families with how to help their child at home in reading, writing and mathematics and 1 hour of literacy projects that families create in collaboration with one another--providing families with the same types of experiences that their children have in school. The workshops and projects are facilitated by certified ESL teachers, content teachers, clinical staff, and parent coordinator. All notifications, agendas and sign-in sheets will be kept on file. Costs include per session for staff and materials for literacy projects for families. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. --- Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) ---  Per session  Per diem Purchased services --- --- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 20 School Name School of Discovery and Exploration School Number 503 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nina Demos Coach Beth Hickey/ Literacy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Emily Burrell Teacher/Subject Area Helen Spruill/Math Teacher/Subject Area Megan Husak/Science Related-Service Provider Diana Santana/Speech Superintendent Karina Costantino Assistant Principal Brooke Precil Coach Rachel Kugelman / Math School Counselor Yesen Jimenez Parent Amy LaTorres Parent Coordinator Tilcia Sola Field Support Center Staff Member Aaron Perez Other (Name and Title) Allison Demas/ESL Coordinator C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 4 28 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1101 Total number of ELLs 652 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 59.22% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the TCWRP assessment tools to measure the progress of our students at P.S. 503. This assessment tool includes concepts about print (to measure basic reading behaviors), letter-sound identification (to measure phonological awareness), high frequency words (to measure automaticity with sight words), running records (to measure decoding and fluency), spelling inventory (to measure application of spelling patterns to writing), and writing on demand (to measures growth in narrative writing craft). In addition we utilize the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, both in English and in Spanish. For assessments in mathematics we use school-based created assessments designed with the oversight of grade level 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  math specialists. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our previously implemented triad model of co-teaching, whereby an ENL teacher is assigned to two classes on a grade, dividing his/her time between the two classes has resulted in the classroom teachers now co-teaching the literacy block (reading, writing, and word work) with ENL teachers. This structure allows teachers to better differentiate instruction and to work with smaller groups of students with greater frequency. With regard to mathematics instruction, each grade has a mathematics specialist assigned to guide instruction and assessments in each class as well as provide coaching and professional development to the classroom teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELL's through NYSESLAT data, State assessments, and formal school-based assessments. Data drives our instruction as well as our evaluation of all programs. We currently evaluate our success through examining our periodic TCRWP data. We look to see if our ELLs are progressing, even within a constant proficiency level, and if their intensive scaffolds and small group instruction is working. By analyzing improvements in NYSESLAT scores over years we identify trends that are reflective of the procedures implemented each year. The increase in the scaffolds in K-2 instruction directly correlates to the increase in advancement in proficiency in those grades. The increase in the number of students who achieve the commanding level of proficiency indicates that the structures and supports we have put in place are supporting their language acquisition. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Upon completion of analysis of the data the information is disseminated to individual teachers as well as across the grade in the form of Google docs providing on-going information regarding all students. These documents provide information regarding student progress in literacy and math as well as their ELL classification. The data is reviewed as a grade at regular grade level meetings to review the progress students are making and to discuss trend and possible alternative approaches to instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use the data derived from our formal and informal assessments to drive our instruction for all our students. We strive to provide universal designs for learning to our students thereby offering all students an appropriate pathway to understanding of content, and language acquisition, be it English language for the ELL, specific content language or academic language for all students. Within the RtI framework all of our students receive instruction as per Tier I. Our focus for ELLs is primarily on language acquisition, especially on oral language development, as this is linked to greater reading comprehension and abilities at higher levels of study. Those students who are seen to be struggling, as indicated by assessments and observation are offered interventions best deemed to provide support in the areas of difficulty (Tiers II and III). Carefully targeted instruction is provided and consistently reviewed and analyzed to determine if the difficulties are the natural development of language acquisition or if they indicate a learning disability, often confused with behaviors presented by students learning a second language. It is only when, after carefully structured and scaffolded, high-quality instruction is provided for ample time with little or slow result evident in student learning that a student is considered to require an individual education plan and receives a formal evaluation (Tier IV). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data derived from analysis of the NYSESLAT results provide the basis for the development of our ELL instructional programs. We review the NYSESLAT results, with careful attention to student performance within each modality, to ascertain 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  where our best efforts for instruction should be placed. In addition we look at trends of student progress, across grades as well as individually, to determine if we need to focus on a particular area of language literacy. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The student performance levels, as per the NYSESLAT results, are shared with teachers at the beginning of the school year. All teachers have access to this information (classroom as well as cluster teachers) in order to support them in developing instructional plans that are appropriate for the students in each class. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for our English Language Learners is done through a wide-scale push-in model on all grade levels. We have 28 ENL co -teachers teachers delivering instruction, mainly in the literacy block. One ENL certified co-teacher services two classes. This means that the one teacher splits their day, half with one class and half with the other class. The teachers co-plan with the classroom teacher and deliver ENL instruction in the room mainly during the literacy block. ENL teachers also co-plan with the classroom teachers to help scaffold other areas of the day to make content comprehensible to the ELLs in that room. ENL teachers also model the ways to incorporate language instruction into all instruction, content support and materials to help expedite their transition into English. Each class is heterogeneously mixed with students representative of English speakers, students who met the commanding proficiency level of the NYSESLAT, and ELLs who are at the Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding levels of language development. Since instruction is provided according to student need the students are often grouped and regrouped according to the lesson and their abilities. The school's triad model of one ENL teacher for 2 classrooms allows for greater flexibility in grouping and providing targeted instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. This year we began a Dual Language Spanish program on kindergarten. This program will spiral up through the grades. The program is self-contained with ten native English speaking students and fifteen native Spanish speaking students. The ELL students in the class are of mixed proficiency levels. The bilingual teacher provides in all academic areas in a simultaneous manner according to the language of the day. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We exceed our mandated minutes through our triad model of push-in co-teaching in kindergarten through 5th grade. Since our triad model pairs one ENL certified teacher with 2 classes on a grade they create their schedules to accommodate the ENL teacher being in each class during the literacy block. The ENL teachers push in and co-teach with the classroom teachers, teaching English Language Arts through a variety of English as a Second Language approaches and with materials designed to scaffold instruction and foster understanding by the students. With the above described model of servicing, we are able to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  service kindergarten through 5th grade students for a total of 145 minutes per day for a total of 725 minutes per week. This exceeds the mandated 360 minutes for entering and emerging students by 365 minutes per week, and the mandated 180 minutes for transitioning and expanding students by 545 minutes per week. Instruction involves language rich, integrated content reading activities based on individual student need. Students are grouped according to data; groups are fluid and students are continuously reassessed and moved into different reading groups based on TCRWP reading levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction for our English Language Learners is done through a wide-scale push-in model on all grade levels. Our triad model of instruction allows one ENL certified teacher to work with only two classes. This affords teachers the flexibility to create schedules allowing the ENL teacher to be in each room during the literacy block. The literacy block follows the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum and all lessons are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, many ENL teachers co-teach social studies with the classroom teachers. Teachers co-plan all lessons with the ENL teacher providing input as to best approaches to provide instruction, such as the use of KWL charts, scaffolded discussion prompts and graphic organizers. This includes planning for lessons presented in the absence of the ESL teacher, thereby allowing the classroom teacher to use best ENL practices to present instruction. Visual word walls and charts to scaffold progress and activity support instruction. We believe experiential learning is critical for all children, especially ELLs. Through hands-on, visual learning, ELLs are exposed to materials and experiences that allow them to utilize a variety of modalities in both English and their native language. While instruction is presented in English native language is incorporated into classroom instruction whenever possible to expedite the students’ transition into English. Student materials, such as writing checklists, are translated into native language to support those students literate in their own language. Lessons are previewed in native language to support understanding of content and facilitate students’ participation in whole class lessons. As per the common core standards, students are expected to access information and demonstrate understanding, critical analysis and evaluation of material as appropriate for their stage of development. All students are expected to respond, orally and in written form, to information and to demonstrate understanding. Students are expected to compare and contrast texts, in all content areas and to make inferences and draw conclusions. They provide evidence and cite examples to support their conclusions. Scaffolded discussions, sentence prompts, charts with transitional words are a few of the supports provided to help foster students’ acquisition of language and help them meet these standards and expectations. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When a Spanish-speaking student enters PS 503 and does not pass the NYSITELL we administer the Spanish Lab to the student to determine the extent of the student’s receptive and expressive language in Spanish. In addition we use Fountas and Pinnell’s Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura to determine the student’s literacy level in Spanish. Since there is no equivalent to the Spanish LAB in other languages we utilize informal assessments. These take the form of book discussions and conferences in native language with students using books in the student’s language. In all areas of study, we continually assess, in English, to determine student understanding and the next steps of instruction. We use the same process in native language with staff members, who speak the same language as the students, conferencing with students to determine their understanding of content. In the Dual Language program students are assessed in both languages. Reading assessments (running records) are conducted in English and Spanish. Math assessments are administered according to the language of the day. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation inside English Language Learner subgroups has been a smoother process for us because of the push-in model and coplanning with the classroom teacher. With regard to SIFE students the ENL teacher uses a variety of differentiation practices in the classroom as well as communicates with the classroom teacher about the special needs that may arise from the interruption of education. Together they plan language and content development and address the social and emotional needs of students. The ENL teachers see SIFE students in a separate remediation time where they are able to support them with individualized issues that they have seen in the class. Grades also have newcomer programs that further help to support SIFE students as well as newcomers. The ENL teacher provides extra intervention as well as language based activities to support SIFE. The majority of our ELL students fall into the newcomer (0-3 years) category. We support them through small group instruction in the literacy block and co-planning with the classroom teacher to implement scaffolds that help these students in the content areas. We support their preparation for the ELA test through the literacy block. Students at ELA test grade levels practice the skills that they will see on the ELA and understand the process of taking a test (bubbling etc..). Students are instructed at their level, so our plan looks like small group instruction that is targeted to the needs of the students. Our developing ELLs, those with between 4 to 6 years, pose different issues to the ENL and classroom teacher. Their needs are addressed through co-planning, where the ENL teacher is helping the classroom teacher differentiate and understand their growth and needs as they are transitioning toward English proficiency. They are also monitoring if the student seems to stagnate and they look at interventions to try to move them through that stage. We collaborate through co-planning between all support people and the classroom teacher on how to best meet the needs of these students. We currently do not have any long term ELL students, those who have completed more than 6 years of service. In fact they are a rare occurrence in a K-5 elementary school, however, in the extreme cases that this exists we cater to the individual needs of the students. This could look like frequent communication between the family, special education teacher (if applicable), general education and ESL teacher to plan targeted instruction. Our ELL students who have achieved a commanding level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT still receive the scaffolds and supports they need to help them learn regardless of their ELL status. Supports are given as needed based upon need, not label. ENL teachers are able to observe and check-in with proficient students through the use of our push-in program model. ENL teachers also know the content that will be delivered through co-planning with the classroom teacher and are able to modify content for the needs of all ELL’s and proficient students in the room. Former ELL’s are identified and testing accommodations are provided for them in regards to all formal assessments. They are given time and half and support materials such as glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use a variety of instructional strategies to access and accelerate learning among ELLs/SWDs. Some of these strategies are shared experiences, visual thinking strategies, kinesthetic learning opportunities, immersion in literary genres and provision of hands-on manipulatives. Sign language, music and hand motions are aligned to word work to provide students with sensory experiences to support acquisition of English letters and words. Music, songs and physical movement incorporated into learning activities allow students to access multiple modes of learning as they need. Content materials are adapted and scaffolded as appropriate to the students’ academic needs, regardless of grade level. High interest, low ability books are used to provide students access to grade level content even if they read below grade level. Student word walls, strategy cards and vocabulary charts are individualized according to student needs. Differentiated charts are present in all classrooms to provide students with visual supports best suited to them. Use of UDL strategies and approaches, such as information provided orally, visually and in written form, offer students various pathways to understanding. Native language previews of lessons and explanations of materials help students understand lessons and how to use the materials. We make use of technological appliances through the use of bilingual software and web-based programs such as Lexia, Raz-Kids and Brainpop ESL, which offer visual and auditory language learning opportunities. Mandated services are recorded in service provider logs. We employ bilingual speech providers and counselors and have alternative placement paraprofessionals to support students in native language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. During specified instructional periods in the school day (e.g. reading), students receive instruction within another classroom in order to facilitate that student's individual academic, social, and emotional growth. Many of our self-contained classes participate in cluster classes (or art residencies) with their general education peers. As in all of our models of instruction, the triad model supports communication and collaboration between general education teachers, special education teachers, and ENL teachers. This communication and collaboration makes it possible to easily move students (flex-grouping) to the least restrictive environment when applicable. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As stated earlier, we support our newcomer students that fall in the less than three year categories through small group instruction in the literacy block and co-planning with the classroom teacher to implement scaffolds that help these students in the content areas. We support their preparation for the ELA test through the literacy block. Students at ELA test grade levels practice the skills that they will see on the ELA and understand the process of taking a test. Students are instructed at their level, so our plan looks like small group instruction that is targeted to the needs of the students. We have also implemented a newcomer program at individual grade levels. These students meet with ENL certified teachers and work in small groups targeted at their language and educational needs. Our ELL’s that have been serviced between 4 to 6 years pose different issues to the ENL and classroom teacher. Their needs are addressed through co-planning, where the ENL teacher is helping the classroom teacher differentiate and understand their growth and needs as they are transitioning toward English proficiency. They are also monitoring if the student seems to stagnate and they look at interventions to try to move them through that stage. Students demonstrating difficulty with writing are given additional support on essay expansion and development. We collaborate through co-planning between all support people and the classroom teacher on how to support these students. Long term ELLs are assessed in literacy and the results are compared to their NYSESLAT results to determine possible areas of overlap that can be supported to help them improve academically. ENL teachers and special education teachers meet through co-planning with the classroom teacher. ENL teachers are aware and have access to the Individualized Education Plan and are able to communicate with the special education teacher on how to best support the IEP as well as ENL issues. Students are assessed formally and informally on a regular basis in both ELA and Math. Individualized intervention plans are designed for students performing below grade level. All of the following intervention services are provided in English with native language support (through a bilingual teacher or paraprofessional) as necessary. Student progress is recorded through conference notes, small group observation sheets, checklists, and formal interim assessment tools. If a student’s academic needs more closely align with a different grade-level, students are then invited to join a classroom on that grade-level for academic instruction. Since students receive math instruction in English with native language support, we make sure to support students who are taking the State Math test in their native language to ensure that they are prepared to demonstrate their understanding of the content in their native language. Several weeks prior to the test, teachers and/or paraprofessionals work with students to review math vocabulary in students’ native language and to familiarize them with the testing language. In addition, translated information and teaching tools are sent home to parents. For any subgroup, the targeted interventions that we provide directly correspond to the instruction that all students receive during the school day. Teachers collaborate with colleagues across the grades to appropriately target instruction. For example, a 4th grade teacher will work with a 1st grade teacher to plan and implement an emergent guided reading lesson. All teaching is directed by student need and is not bound by grade level. Our Science program is FOSS (Full Option Science System), where students are immersed in an in-depth, hands-on program that is differentiated through co-planning between the ENL coordinator and the Science teachers. Our lower grade science teacher is ENL certified. Paraprofessionals support the curriculum and content through native language use. Reading and writing components are always included in the lessons and are directly related to the hands-on activities for easier acquisition of words and understanding of content. UDL approaches of presenting 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  information orally, visually and in written form allow students multiple pathways to understanding. Our Social Studies program allows opportunities for students to work in heterogeneous groups to create group projects. ENL teachers co-teach social studies with the classroom teachers using ENL practices and native language support when appropriate to present information. Topical books are provided to children on their individual reading levels in both English and their native language. In addition, topical books in English, scaffolded according to reading level, allow students of differing abilities to access information on the same grade level topic. We believe experiential learning is critical for all children, and especially ELLs. Through hands-on, visual learning, ELLs are exposed to materials and experiences that allow them to utilize a variety of modalities in both English and their native language. Bilingual staff provide native language support to students requiring such support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we are looking towards greater integration of content and theme-based instruction in order to support students in transferring information and understanding between varying curricular areas. In addition we are developing a balanced language program to incorporate grammar and language goals into daily instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this point we are not discontinuing any services or programs for any English Language Learners. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL’s are afforded equal access to all programs because we do not discriminate against any group or grade level for school programs. 59% of our student population are identified as current ELLs. In addition, 80% of our correspondence home is sent home in native language. This indicates that our ELL population are our majority, not an isolated group. We endeavor to provide our students with as much exposure to the arts and artistic pursuits as funding and time constraints will allow. Creative scheduling allows all of our students to receive some combination of performing arts, dance and visual arts weekly. Special programs provided by outside organizations are provided for grades regardless of ELL or SWD status. Our after school clubs are open to all students, not just one particular group. Clubs fall into the categories of academic and recreational, such as chess, cheerleading, chorus, art and athletics. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of our instructional materials are designed to support students at their ability level. Classrooms all have leveled libraries so students have access to multiple texts on their reading level. Our math program includes activities designed to meet the needs of the student regardless of the grade, so our students have ‘just right’ books and ‘just right’ math materials. We are making strides in increasing our use of technology and technological support for English Language Learners at P.S. 503. There are Smart TVs in every room that are used to differentiate lessons through use of visuals, internet connections and virtual tours. All classrooms also have document cameras, scanners, digital cameras, and video cameras. These are used for all subgroups. We have at least one computer in each classroom and a wireless classroom computer lab that can be brought into the room. We have iPads for use by our students to support their reading abilities. In addition, we have a technology lab. We are using these computers to support ELL’s through the use of word processing programs, translations sites, ENL websites (BrainpopESL, StarFall). SIFE and newcomer students can use the computers and iPads to utilize various language software as well as interactive language games online. We have a technology teacher who teaches technology skills directly to students and also support teachers in creating materials and instruction using technology. The Sketchpad software is utilized to provide students with various learning modalities of content area instruction (e.g. equivalents in math). Science is all hands-on instruction which offers students ample opportunities to explore science tools (balances, calibrated cylinders, magnifying glasses) as well as observing change over time (insect metamorphosis, plant growth). Our social studies programs have incorporated an art component in which students are able to present their understanding using various mediums. This supports their visual thinking skills and enhance their understanding and perception of bygone eras and situations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We believe native language is an integral part of our differentiation in the classroom. The ENL teachers have a library of native language materials to help fill in any gaps cross grade levels. Many of our ENL teachers are bilingual in languages represented at our school. This is helpful to aide in translation of content and materials. We also use co-planning between the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher to create intentional groupings (a non-speaker paired with a bilingual student, or put in a triad). Bilingual teachers help to deliver content area instruction in native language where needed and bilingual paraprofessionals are also available to help support students. In math, these bilingual paras help to deliver content instruction in the students’ native language, as needed. In addition, students have access to math bilingual dictionaries that they can use to help them translate math specific vocabulary. Students who need it receive in class and homework assignments in their native language. In ELA, the bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals work with students to develop their English Language reading and writing skills by providing the necessary translation to access the content. A newcomer toolkit has been created that includes translated documents such as reading logs, math sheets, and writing explanations. The translated materials that explain classroom routines are available for teachers to access as needed. These items include visuals as well as native language support. Small group math test prep occurs in native language. All materials sent home are translated. In the Dual Language program instruction and assessment is provided in both English and Spanish according to the language of the day. Reading assessments are completed in both languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services correspond to the ELL’s age and grade level. Children are placed in age appropriate classes regardless of educational experience or ability. All required services correspond to their grade level/age appropriateness. Upon registration we check birth dates and previous school history in order to make sure students are placed appropriately. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share a building with another K-5 elementary school. We share the use of facilities, not services. We share the use of the gym, auditorium, schoolyard and cafeteria. Agreement upon schedules allows for staggered lunch hours and recess, utilizing the cafeteria, auditorium and schoolyard. A shared calendar allows both schools access to the auditorium. In addition, a mobile dividing door in the auditorium affords both schools the opportunity to use half of the space at the same time. The gym is also equipped with a dividing door. In addition, the gym teachers of both schools work together to support each other and provide students the opportunity to engage in athletic activites together. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All incoming ELL students are provided a welcome packet with a book in English and a book in native language, an English alphabet chart, a DVD with instruction on the alphabet and letter sound correspondence, a DVD with a variety of popular stories narrated in English and a letter, in native language, that provides information about school programs and special events. In addition we offer a parent orientation for new admits that provides parents and students with a tour of the school as well as an overview of activities and events offered throughout the school year. As new ELLs enroll during the school year they are included in newcomer programs to help them acclimate to their new surroundings. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this point we do not offer language electives for ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our new Dual Language model program is a self-contained Spanish/English program. Instruction in all areas is conducted in both languages using a simultaneous approach. There is a language designated for a particular day. Monday and Wednesday are designated for Spanish instruction (all areas) and Tuesday and Thursday are designated for English instruction (all areas). Cluster teachers (science, art, dance) teach in the language of the day. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers, ENL, general education and special education, participate in professional development at school and outside of the school. There are various types of professional development offered in house and outside the school. Regardless of the teachers’ certification our student population is primarily ELLs, therefore the emphasis of most of our professional development for all staff is focused on ELL support. Every teacher participates in a 80 minutes weekly professional development with other colleagues on their grade, facilitated by an ENL certified teacher. These groups select topics based upon the needs of their students, primarily focusing on language acquisition in terms of comprehensible input and output. Topics include: MSV for ELLs, Inferential Comprehension, Engagement Methods and Language Acquisition, Strategies for Supporting ELLs. In addition they address best practices in co-teaching methods and incorporating content in language instruction. Through their study of the topic and through classroom observations, teachers develop strategies and routines and then implement them within their classrooms. Teachers College staff developers have been hired to provide Literacy Based professional development to all our teachers, including ENL teacher, and paraprofessionals. All of this professional development on curriculum design is aligned to the Common Core Standards. Our focus is on active engagement and accountable talk in conjunction with language acquisition. This focus is particularly relevant to our ELLs since informal assessments and teacher observations have shown a lack of active engagement on behalf of many of our ELLs. Also, our literacy and RtI coaches provide ample professional development to all teachers on various topics within reading and writing. They also provide individual coaching based on teacher/student need. In addition, our teachers attend Teachers College calendar days which offer a variety of Common Core aligned professional development opportunities. These include such topics as Working with ELLs, Differentiation for ELL/SWD, Developing Phonemic Awareness and Supporting Vocabulary Development in ELLs, RTI Process for ELLs. All bilingual staff members receive professional development in dealing with ELL students and their parents with regard to supporting them as translators. Non-pedagogues receive professional development in understanding and translating academic language. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our bilingual guidance counselor and 2 bilingual parent coordinators/liaisons (Chinese and Spanish) attend district-wide Middle School open houses with parents to determine which middle school programs are appropriate for our students. Most of these middle schools offer a different ESL servicing model than our push-in program. Due to this, a school-wide goal to help our students reach proficiency level before leaving PS 503. In addition, our bilingual guidance counselor serves as a liaison between 5th grade teachers and middle schools in order to make sure our staff members are best able to transition our students into middle school. The school guidance counselor works closely with classroom teachers to ensure that they understand the middle school application and articulation process. The school guidance counselor and the bilingual parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  coordinators hold workshops for teachers, parents and students providing them with information about middle schools, the application process and assistance with the process. They ensure that parents are informed of their rights and options and provide individual assistance as necessary. ENL certified teachers provide professional development for the entire staff in 6 week inquiry cycles, focusing on specific classroom issues and students. Topics addressed are areas of instruction surrounding language acquisition, comprehension, engagement, universal design, modification of instruction, ENL best practices and content integration and assessment of understanding. Agendas, attendance sheets, artifacts, materials and Google docs with meeting notes serve as record of the various professional development activities. In addition, Teachers College provides professional development for staff members across instructional needs. Teachers also attend calendar days at Teachers College. A master list of all professional development offered, with the names of the attendees is maintained by the Literacy Coach. A school-wide professional development document also records any professional development activity attended by staff members. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to mandated parent orientations, curriculum conferences and parent-teacher conferences teachers meet with parents to address student progress and their developmental needs during weekly blocks of time designated for family involvement. Translation, if needed is provided via in-house translators. These interim meetings are documented in the Parent Communication Log. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents at PS 503 are welcome and an integral part of our team. Parents are encouraged to volunteer in the classroom, lunchroom and for specific support activities. Parents of all languages and cultures have participated in our volunteer opportunities as class parents, chaperones and special project organizers. Parents have helped to develop policy and allocate funds through he School Leadership team. Parents attend numerous school-wide events such as student assemblies, monthly PTA meetings, monthly Family Fridays, monthly Coffee with the Principal, parent workshops, chess tournaments, field day, PTA sponsored activities as well as celebrations specific to ethnicity. Parents of all cultures and languages participate, volunteer and are instrumental in making each event a success. All notification for all activities listed above are sent home to families in their preferred language and posters with the tranlsated information are displayed outside the school entrances. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nina Demos, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 503 School DBN: 20K503 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Nina Demos Title Principal Brooke Precil Assistant Principal Tilcia Sola Parent Coordinator Emily Burrell ENL/Bilingual Teacher Amy LaTorres Parent Helen Spruill/Math Teacher/Subject Area Megan Husak/Science Teacher/Subject Area Beth Hickey/Literacy Rachel Kugelman/Math Coach Coach Yesen Jimenez School Counselor Karina Costantino Aaron Perez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Allison Demas Other ESL Coordinator Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 5/31/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 20K503 School Name: School of Discovery & Exploration Superintendent: K. Costantino The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kenia Otero Laro Assistant Principal yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Currently, our community serves four language groups: Chinese, Spanish, English and Arabic. All parent materials - written and oral - are presented in English, Spanish, Arabic and English. When students enroll, parents automatically inform the school their preferred language of communication via the Home Language Survey. This information is maintained by the Pupil Personnel Secretary. This information is also input in a registration spreadsheet maintained by the ESL Coordinator. In addition, classroom teachers survey their parents to double check the preferred language of each. This information is recorded on the Home Language Google document. Copies of all printed materials are made in the appropriate amount for the appropriate number of languages. Translators are provided for parents during all conferences and meetings. The school Parent Coordinator and Parent Liaison are bilingual. All meetings, workshops, and orientations are translated with the use of simultaneous translation equipment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Russian English Chinese Any Gujarati Bamara Arabic Cantonese 918 1 335 303 1 1 21 0 57.66 .06 21.04 19.03 .1 .1 2.05 0 917 1 334 285 1 1 23 1 57.66 .06 20.98 17.9 .1 .1 2.24 .1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Every document distributed to parents is translated into the languages preferred by our parents. This includes all school notices, PTA announcements, classroom letters, report cards, parent reporting tools, trip permission slips, school newsletters and any other missive. Every informative poster displayed at the school entrances is also translated into appropriate languages. In addition September - June Each grade has oral and written translators assigned to it. In 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  telephone notifications, via a phone messaging system, are also translated into native language. addition, we have a vocabulary resource document to support stream-lined translation. When teachers need oral translation they submit a digital form and translators are assigned on a daily basis from the spreadsheet created from the form submissions. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parents will meet with teachers at Parent Orientations within 10 days of enrollment, Curriculum Conferences for all students within the first 2 weeks of school, Interim Conversations 2 times per year, Parent-Teacher Conferences 3 times a year, monthly PTA meetings, monthly Coffee with the Principal sessions, monthly parent workshops, annual meetings with ELL parents, meetings with the guidance counselor, social work and school psychologist, IEP meetings and additional parent-teacher conferences held during the year to support student progress. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? September - June We use simultaneous translation devices. Families wear headsets and hear the information translated in real time by bilingual school staff members 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  (usually parent coordinator and parent liaison) who are familiar with the content. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school messenger system contacts families in their preferred language as listed in ATS. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Translation and interpretation is a critical component of the school's Standard Operating Procedures Manual (SOPM) and all staff receive professional development on this content at the beginning of the school year. In addition, each grade has a "family liaison" who meets weekly with the LAC to reflect on structures for family communication and improve them. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Posters, translated into all pertinent languages, will be posted at the main entrance of the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Periodic parent surveys will be distributed to parents to assess our ability to provide parents with appropriate language services. Parents are surveyed at PTA meetings and Coffee with the Principal meetings. Parents are also able to speak with our bilingual Parent Coordinator and Parent Liaison as well as members of the PTA. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 
