2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 20K506 School Name: P.S. 506: THE SCHOOL OF JOURNALISM & TECHNOLOGY Principal: DANA PARENTINI 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The School of Journalism and Technology 332000010506 Pre-K through 5 330-59 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11220 718-492-0087 School Number (DBN): 20K506 718-492-9431 Phone Number: Fax: Maria Grajales mgrajal@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dana Parentini Michael Scheer Silvia Alonso Maria Grajales Jacqueline Brody -- Helene Onserud District Information Geographical District: 20 Karina Costantino Superintendent: 415-89 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 Superintendent’s Office Address: KCostan@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-759-4912 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauricière de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415-89 th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)-759-4862 Phone Number: 718-759-4690 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dana Parentini Michael Scheer Silvia Alonso NA Jacqueline Brody NA NA Helene Onserud Maria Grajales Catherine Soto *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CSA Member/ UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Luz Peralta Silvia Alonso Jacqueline Brody Jillian Rios Maria Velasco UFT PTAPresident Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 506, The School of Global Communication through Journalism and Technology, is a nurturing learning environment, which together with parents and staff, promotes and encourages the development of the whole child. As a community of learners, we are dedicated to providing our students with a high quality, standards-driven education. Through differentiated instruction and authentic learning opportunities, our children will have the necessary capabilities to succeed in a diverse and technologically advanced society. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 506 is an elementary school (Kindergarten through grade 5) with approximately 800 students and over 100 staff members. The learning population is comprised of approximately 30% Asian, 1% Black, 65% Hispanic, and 4% White students. Approximately 32% of our students are English Language Learners (ELL) and 18% of students have an Individualized Education Program (IEP). Rigorous Instruction and Supportive Environment P.S. 506, The School of Global Communication through Journalism and Technology, is a nurturing learning environment, which together with parents and staff, promotes and encourages the development of the whole child. As a community of learners, we are dedicated to providing our students with a high quality, standards-driven education. Through differentiated instruction and authentic learning opportunities, our children will have the necessary capabilities to succeed in a diverse and technologically advanced society. In doing so, it is our goal to create partnerships with various art organizations, radio, print, and television media. This will provide real world experiences to further enhance the academic, physical, and social development of our students. P.S. 506 is a "Leader in Me" School where we work hard to meet students’ educational needs, as well as their social needs. Students are taught Steven Covey’s "Seven Leadership Habits", that help students maximize their unique talents. Students are proactive members of the community and are encouraged to apply for jobs, both inside and outside of the classroom. Students have opportunities to participate in multiple teams throughout the school, such as Student Lighthouse Team, Tech Crew, Student Council Committee and Volunteer Bees. Students also create and track both academic and personal goals on a regular basis. In 2017, PS 506 earned, "Lighthouse Status," after a review about the leadership practices embedded in our school culture. Collaborative Teachers The staff members are life-long learners who value professional development that is differentiated and provided by both the school and outside organizations. Teachers also set, track, and create new goals once goals are achieved. This is done through professional conversations with colleagues and administrators. Strong Family / Community Ties We are an inclusive community and work hard to create partnerships between the school and the home. Parents are invited to workshops, classroom events, school-wide events, performances and trips on a regular basis. We also have multiple partnerships with outside community organizations. We have a partnership with Center for Family Life (CFL), which provides after-school support. Partnerships also include Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn Connections, New Victory Theater, Leader in Me Foundation, as well as other outside organizations. Each partnership serves as a resource or extension to our school day. 2018-19 CEP 10  At P. S. 506, we value arts education. Our school offers a dance program, school chorus, dance club, violin program, music program, visual arts, as well as theater arts. For the past few years, our students have had the opportunity to perform live on the stage of the Marquis Theater on Broadway. The students also participate in the “Disney in Schools Program.” Students also have opportunities to perform for the school community at our monthly assemblies and PTA meetings. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In 2016, 33 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the state ELA assessment. In 2017, 31 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the state ELA assessment. In 2018, 34 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the State ELA assessment. We want to help more students reach proficiency on the state ELA assessment, with a focus on English Language Learners (ELL) and students with disabilities (SWD). We will continue to provide targeted, small group instruction and begin to integrate the hallmarks of advanced literacy. In 2016, 38.9 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the state math assessment. In 2017 and 2018, 41 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the state math assessment. We continue to work hard to significantly increase the number of students scoring at proficiency level on the state math assessment. We are supplementing the Exemplars math program in our existing math curriculum to provide students with more opportunities to problem solve and justify their thinking. In addition, we will continue to provide targeted small group instruction, as well as offer a math intervention program on Saturday mornings. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Last year, we made the most progress in the strong family community ties element. We increased the number of workshops offered to parents. Parents were also invited once per month to visit their child's classroom to participate in reading, writing, math, and Leader-in Me activities. PTA meetings were well-attended as parents came to see their children receive a "Student of the Month" award or see their children perform in the PTA performing arts share. As a Community School, we offered parents a variety of workshops through the Center for Family Life (CFL) and the Office of Adult Continuing Education. We will build upon our success last year by continuing to offer many opportunities for families to visit our school. The area of focus this year is rigorous instruction. In 2016, 33 percent of our students scored a level three or four on the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. In 2017, 31 percent of our students scored a level three or four on the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. In 2018, 34 percent of students scored a level three or four on the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. Teachers and administrators will meet during weekly grade meetings to analyze data, identify gaps in and modify instruction and monitor for progress using a variety of assessment tools. Our inquiry work will align to this work so that we can monitor certain subgroups of students, such as English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. The teacher observation process will focus on the work taking place in grade meetings to ensure that the rigorous instruction being planned in grade meetings is taking place in the classrooms. We will also schedule vertical team meetings weekly so that there is alignment across the grades. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 20K506 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 793 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 93.6% % Reduced Lunch 32.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 64.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 82 82 94.7% 2.8% 18.8% 0.9% 30.9% 0.3% 4 0% 8.8 41.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A NO N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous Instruction In 2016, 33 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the state ELA assessment. In 2017, 31 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the State ELA assessment. In 2018, 34 percent of students scored a three or four proficiency level on the State ELA assessment. This year, we want to continue helping more students reach proficiency on the state ELA assessment. in 2017, five percent of students with disabilities (SWD) scored at proficient levels. In 2018, seven percent of students with disabilities scored at proficient levels. in 2017, no ELL students scored at proficient levels. in 2018, 7 percent of ELL students scored at proficient levels. This was an increase in both subgroups from the previous year. In our last quality review under the category of assessment, it was noted that "Teachers have provided them (students) with verbal and written feedback to improve the quality of their work. Although students were able to understand their teachers’ comments, only a few students were able to provide clear next steps and how they have used their feedback in other ways." Based on this data, our focus this year will be to improve student learning outcomes for all subgroups (ELL and SWD) by focusing on increasing the level of rigor through identifying gaps within the curricula during vertical team meetings, grade meetings, professional learning communities as well as monitoring for progress by using a variety of assessments. Effective School Leadership Strengths 2018-19 CEP 13  Parents feel like an integral part of the school community through opportunities to provide feedback and participate in shared decision making. Data from the NYC School Quality Guide: 97 percent of families said that the principal encourages feedback from the community through regular meetings. 96 percent of families said that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. Priority Needs Based on the NYC School Quality Guide, teachers felt there was a lack of a clear instructional vision as well as coherence across the grades. Data from the NYC School Quality Guide: In 2017, 85 percent of teachers said that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school. In 2018, 61 percent of teachers said that principal communicates a clear vision for the school. In 2017, 86% of teachers said that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels. In 2018, 64% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of all students scoring at or above proficient levels in ELA will increase from 34 percent to 38 percent as measured by the 2018 New York State ELA assessment. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September through June Administrators; Grade Level Facilitators; Classroom Teachers Strengthening the Instructional Core For English Language Arts (ELA), we will continue using Journeys curriculum. Modifications were made to the program in order to align it to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). In the lower grades, Orton Gillingham is used to help students learn decoding and phonemic awareness. Students also participate in guided reading and small group instruction. In the upper grades, application of skills/strategies using complex text and close reading strategies are included to raise the level of rigor and critical thinking skills. While reflecting and revising the curricular plans, the focus will be Hallmark 1 of Advanced Literacy that ensures students work with a variety of texts that include big ideas and content. In addition, we will continue using Teachers’ College Writing Units of Study to supplant the Journeys writing program. All K-5 Students, including students with disabilities and English Language Learners Academic Intervention / English as a New Language Instructional Alignment Our AIS providers will focus on first and third grade students. They will push into the classroom providing small group, differentiated instruction. In addition, they will attend grade meetings so that all instruction is aligned. The providers will have time in their schedule to meet and plan collaboratively. The ENL providers push into the classroom and co-teach with the classroom teacher to provide the additional supports that English Language Learners require. The ENL providers plan with the classroom teacher using the language progressions. 2018-19 CEP 15  Throughout the curricula, Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies will be incorporated to assist Students with Disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELL). This year, ENL students will participate in a robotics program which is integrated into the science scope and sequence. These hands on activities will help support language development as students participate in problem solving in group work. Parents will be invited to participate in coding and assisting their children in the robotics program. There will be a fair at the end of the cycle for students to showcase their work to parents. We have purchased an online library to give our students access to books at home and encourage reading outside of the classroom. Students will have their own subscription, giving them access to thousands of books. Teachers will be able to monitor students' reading activity. Assessment and Next Instructional Steps In ELA, students are frequently assessed using Fountas and Pinnel, running records, checklists, rubrics, and teacher observations in order to monitor students’ understanding of literacy concepts. This information will be used to determine and plan next instructional steps within the classrooms. Using data, teachers form flexible groups to allow students to participate and complete assignments based on their academic needs. Teachers will help students set goals, monitor progress and reflect on learning. Weekly Vertical Team and Grade Meetings Teachers from kindergarten through fifth grade meet weekly during the ELA vertical teams where they discuss coherence and progressively increasing rigor in tasks across the grades, specifically through close reading. The focus of grade meetings is to assess instructional practices and the level of rigor embedded in each student task. - - - - - - - - 2018-19 CEP 16  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be monthly workshops for parents that address Common Core Learning Standards in literacy and math. Teachers publish monthly grade newsletters published on the school website. The newsletter informs parents about the different topics taught in reading, writing, math, social studies and science. The newsletters will be translated in Spanish and Chinese. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assessment The data specialist will assist the staff with gathering / interpreting data from a variety of assessment tools. The school has also purchased licensing for Fountas and Pinnell, a progress tracking system, to help teachers monitor and analyze important assessment data. We will allocate per session funds for the data specialist(s) to gather the data. Grade Meetings All teachers have at least one extra preparation period to meet with their colleagues on the grade and administrators. In addition, some teachers had an additional preparation period so that they can meet with their colleagues across the grades on the vertical teams. Saturday Programs Per session budget allocations have been set aside for Saturday programs for teachers. RTI Intervention Program Two out of classroom teachers will support students who are struggling in ELA. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 15% increase in the number of students making progress as measured by an increase of rubric score by one or more levels as compared to the November administration of short and extended responses that measure reading comprehension. In the third, fourth and fifth grades, students will be administered short and extended response questions in November and February to assess student progress and academic need. An 2018-19 CEP 17  item analysis will be created so that teachers can target instruction to best meet their students’ needs. Sub groups of student data will be analyzed during inquiry team meetings and instructional adjustments will be made. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Short Reading Passages; Short and Extended Responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a Leader-in-Me school, teachers and staff spend time helping students understand and implement child-friendly versions of Steven Covey's Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. Teachers help students set goals, monitor progress and reflect on learning. We will continue to help all students, including ELL's and SWD, take ownership of their learning and be an integral part of the community in which all they feel supported. In our last Quality Review Report, PS 506 received a "Well Developed" for indicator 3.4 (High Expectations). The reviewer stated, "School leaders consistently communicate high expectations and provide training to staff. School leaders and staff effectively communicate and support parents on expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness. Effective communication results in a culture of mutual accountability among staff and successful partnerships with families that lead students toward high expectations." Culture in the Lunchroom and at Recess Last year, there were incidents reported through Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) that occurred either in the lunchroom or the cafeteria. We decided to focus on improving the culture in both the lunchroom and the yard so that students' feel safe, supported in a social setting. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will collaboratively implement systems to support the social-emotional and physical well-being of the students as measured by a 10 percent decrease in incidents reported on the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Recess Our two recess facilitators, school aides and lunchroom coordinator will help make our lunch/recess program safe and fun for all students. The recess coordinators will assist with the structure, logistics and games that take place at recess. The Comfort Dog Pilot Program We will continue our Comfort Dog program. Our guidance counselor adopted a dog from North Shore Animal League that was specially screened for this program. The dog assists with de-escalation strategies for select students as well as teach students about empathy and care for all living creatures using the Mutti-i-grees curriculum. Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence -- The RULER Program Last year, principals in District 20 and 21 attended workshops around the RULER Program (Recognize Emotions in Self and Others; Understanding the Causes and Consequences of Emotions; Labeling Emotions Accurately; Expressing Emotions Appropriately; Regulating Emotions Effectively). This year, additional staff (guidance counselors and teachers) will be trained through the Yale Center about how to integrate it into the culture of the school. Teachers will be offered professional development throughout the year that helps them incorporate the the components of the program into classroom discussions (mood meter; meta-moments) Leader in Me We will continue to teach students about the Seven Habits of Highly Effective People through the Leader in Me Program. Teachers read, "The Book of the Month, as well as teach, "Habit Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in Kindergarten through fifth grade September through June Students who receive counseling October - June Lunch and Recess Coordinators; School Aides; Student Junior Recess Coaches Center for Family Life employees (CBO) Guidance Counselor Comfort Dog, Lulu Classroom Teachers Select students in classes All students in kindergarten through fifth grade. December through June Guidance Counselors; Administrators All students in kindergarten September through June Administrators; Classroom Teachers 2018-19 CEP 20 of the Month", to their students. In addition, students set and track SMART goals in their leadership binders, which they share with their parents during open school nights. through fifth grade 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold parent workshops after our Family Days. We will share information about the Leader in Me Program, the Comfort Dog Pilot Program, The RULER program, as well as our recess program. In addition, our parent coordinator will be attending workshops about social emotional intelligence and how it help our families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use Title 1 funding to pay for the recess and lunch coordinators for a total of 20 periods per week either in the lunchroom, auditorium or yard supervising lunch and/or recess. The Comfort Dog program requires an investment in dog/owner training. Teachers and guidance counselors will participate in workshops at the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence. Coverage will be needed for the teachers' programs. Our parent coordinator will attend a series of workshops around social emotional health. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor the number of incidents submitted via OORS report and conduct monthly comparisons to determine if we are on target for lowering the number of incident reports by at least 10 percent as compared to last year. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A reduction in the number of OORS report as reported through the Safety Portal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the last Quality Review Report, P.S. 506 received "Well Developed" for our collaborative teaching practices. We will continue to focus on data-driven and targeted small group instruction to meet the needs of all learners by helping teachers analyze student work, plan for next instructional steps and modify instruction to include tools and supports for students. We want to continue helping students, specifically ELL and SWD, reach proficiency on the state ELA assessment. In 2018, 6 percent of students with disabilities scored at proficient levels. In 2018, 7 percent of ELL students scored at proficient levels. This year, as part of the professional learning communities, we will look to leverage successful practices to a wider student population and note improvements in overall student achievement on key measures. There will be more common assessments this year to determine how groups of students (ELL's and SWD) are performing based on instructional changes made. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will have engaged in three cycles of inquiry work to help plan instructional modifications for students with disabilities and English Language Learners. As a result of the work, we will see 15 percent improvement in student outcomes on a select group of assessments for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? P.S. 506 will form grade level inquiry groups to help teachers analyze student data and plan next instructional steps, specifically for students with disabilities (SWD) and English language learners (ELL). Grade level teams will meet weekly to analyze a variety of student work, set long term and short term goals for students, identify and implement research-based instructional strategies, and analyze student outcomes to determine the effectiveness of the implemented strategies. Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners In addition to following the inquiry cycle, teachers will have opportunities to visit lab-site classrooms once per inquiry cycle to observe the strategies and instructional modifications in action. Teachers will have opportunities to observe and reflect on student outcomes and make recommendations for improving future instruction. Grade level planning days will be scheduled so that teachers can revise the curricula based on the inquiry work. - To support the grade level inquiry work and address teachers’ interest (based on the PD survey) professional development workshops will be offered around the following topics:  The four hallmarks of Advanced Literacy  introduction to the Next Generation Standards (ELA; Math; Science) integrating close reading strategies   Researched Based Programs (Such as Orton Gillingham Cycle 1: October through November Administrators; Classroom Teachers; Out-of-Classroom Teachers Cycle 2: December- February Cycle 3: March - May - - All Teachers November -- May Part of Monday Afternoons - Administrators; Classroom Teachers; Out-of-Classroom Teachers and Leveled Literacy Intervention) Implementing CCLS instructional shifts   understanding characteristics of text complexity and Lexile levels 2018-19 CEP 24  Teachers will have to time at the end of every cycle to summarize their findings. This will allow them to reflect on the research-based strategies and modify future instruction as needed. In addition, teachers will decide upon a common assessment to administer to all students with a focus on ELL and SWD students to note improvement in outcomes or modify focus for the next cycle. After the end of each inquiry cycle, teachers will participate in a planning day in which they will have an opportunity to reflect and modify curricula maps and plans based on the inquiry findings. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers January Administrators April June Classroom Teachers; Out-of-Classroom Teachers All Teachers January April Administrators; June Classroom Teachers; Out-of-Classroom Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will develop a parent inquiry group where parents can pose questions about helping their children at home. They will engage in the inquiry process by identifying best practices through research, trying out the strategies at home and reflecting on the results. The parent inquiry process will be facilitated by staff members during Tuesday parent engagement time. Parent inquiry teams will meet monthly This will be facilitated by staff interested in joining this professional learning community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher teams will meet every other Monday afternoon during PD time (2:40 – 4:00) to engage in inquiry work. Teachers will use one grade meeting per inquiry cycle so that they can observe teachers implementing research-based instructional strategies. Team facilitators will be selected and they will receive additional training to help support their teams’ goals, agendas, and protocols. Per diem substitutes will be used for the planning days scheduled for teams three times per year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, teachers will have participated in two cycles of inquiry work and noted student outcomes for ELL and SWD students using a common assessment across the grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. K-2 -- Running Records with Comprehension Questions 3-5 -- Short Passages with Multiple Choice / Short and Extended Response Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Parents feel like an integral part of the school community through opportunities to provide feedback and participate in shared decision making. Data from the NYC School Quality Guide: 97% of families said that the principal encourages feedback from the community through regular meetings. 96% of families said that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. Priority Needs Based on the NYC School Quality Guide, teachers felt there was a lack of a clear instructional vision as well as coherence across the grades. Data from the NYC School Quality Guide: In 2017, 85% of teachers said that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school. In 2018, 61% of teachers said that principal communicates a clear vision for the school. In 2017, 86% of teachers said that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels. In 2018, 64% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the category of Effective School Leadership will increase to level 3 as evidenced by the School Quality Snapshot. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Vision and Coherence Grade Level Teacher Teams October- Administrators June We will continue to build on the work started last year around close reading; however we will implement the following action plan to ensure clear vision and instructional coherence across grades: This year, we will refine the work to ensure that there is one school wide focus and alignment of work across structures. We will continue our work in close reading across the grades while infusing hallmarks of Advanced Literacy as a vehicle to increase rigor. We will ensure coherence and alignment throughout all structures, such as vertical team meetings, grade meetings and professional learning communities. For example, we will continue to refine and modify lessons and adjust teaching practice guided by analysis of student work. This will combine the structures of grade meetings during the school day and professional learning communities on Monday afternoons. The vertical team will be the school wide forum that will help ensure coherence across grades for implementing new school wide protocols guided by the hallmarks of Advanced Literacy. The administrative team will conduct weekly classroom observations around the school wide focus to determine patterns, trends and provide immediate grade level feedback. The information gathered during these visits will also be used to plan next steps for vertical team, and / or grade level meetings. Each week, we publish a weekly newsletter distributed via email to all staff members. This will include a summary of the week's vertical team work. In addition at the end of every inquiry cycle, there will be a share so that all members of the school community are aware of the work across grades. Grade Level and Cross Grade Level Teacher Teams October - June Administrators Vertical Team Teacher Liaisons Classroom Teachers October - June Administrators All Staff October - June Administrators We will form a curricular team to assess a variety of standards based curricula using an Advanced Literacy template as a long Select Teachers November - March Administrators 2018-19 CEP 28 term plan to ensure curricular and instructional coherence. The team will make recommendations about piloting programs to try for consideration of school wide adoption. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each month, there are parent workshops scheduled after Family Fun Days. We will schedule a workshop in which we share our instructional focus and participate in close reading activities so parents understand the standards and expectations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade meetings and vertical team meetings required two additional cluster teachers to provide the needed coverage for classroom teachers. Professional Learning communities take place on Monday afternoons during professional time. Inter-visitation work will take place during grade meetings. Professional development support will provided from the District as part of the State Integration Grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, coherent school wide protocols will be evident in professional learning communities as well as classroom practices through observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas and notes from grade meetings Classroom observation notes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We want to continue to create more opportunities for parents to become part of the school community. Last year, we saw at minimum a 20 percent increase in parent attendance in various workshops and activities. We want to increase participation an additional 5 percent this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent participation in Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings, parent workshops, open house events and other parent activities will increase by 5 percent as measured by attendance. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During one of the first workshops, we will give parents a survey to determine interest for future workshops and events. Parents October - November Administrators One day each month, we will host an open school event where parents will be invited to participate in an activity in their child's classroom. Each month, we will focus on a different subject. Some planned examples are a reading activity where parents read with their children. Parents will also have an opportunity to play math games with their children. We will also schedule events in other subjects: Social Studies, Science, Robotics and Computer Coding, etc. Throughout the year, we will host family engagement cultural celebrations after school. After each open school event, we will host a workshop for parents facilitated by teachers or other staff. We will use the parent survey results to help plan appropriate workshops. Parents Parents Students Parents Grade-level student performances will immediately follow each PTA meeting. Parents will have an opportunity to see their children sing and perform during this performing arts share. In Parents Parent Coordinators Administrators Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinators Classroom Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinators One Morning each month for the duration of the school year Three events throughout the school year One morning each month for the duration of the school year One morning each month for the duration of 2018-19 CEP 31  addition, we will also award, "Student of the Month," from each class so parents can celebrate their children's success. the school year Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are part of the Community Schools Program. Center for Family Life is our CBO partner. We offer families many opportunities to participate in adult learning and workshops through Center for Family Life and Lutheran Medical. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will set aside time each month for parents to visit their child's classroom. Parents will be invited to participate in workshops and activities during parent engagement time on Tuesday afternoon. The theater and drama teacher will have a preparation period scheduled to help plan monthly assemblies for the PTA meetings. Teachers will be able to use Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement Time to plan for monthly parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parental involvement in PTA meetings, workshops and open school events will increase by least 2 percent as measured through attendance documents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 32  Attendance Documents Learning Environment Survey participation rate and responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score Level 1and 2based on the stateELA exam Fountasand Pinnell levels Teacher recommendation based on student performance and progress Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students receive AIS service during the school day in the classroom Reading Recovery strategies and methodologies are used Small groups in the classroom Orton-Gillingham strategies and methodologies are implemented Leveled Literacy Intervention Skills and strategies are taught through leveled books Interactive Writing will support students in acquiring writing skills Select teachers in K, 1 and 2 are trained in and implement Reading Reform in their classrooms. 2018-19 CEP 34  Mathematics Go Math end of unit assessments Teachers confer with students to address specific academic needs Teachers work with students in small groups based on data During the school day Go Math mid unit checkpoints Exemplars performance tasks Students who scored a 1 and 2 as on theNYS Math assessment. Teacher observations of students conducting experiments using science Foss Kits are in grades K-5 Student writing in the science notebooks and culminating activities Teachers assess student writing in social studies, as well asculminating activities Students exhibiting at-risk behavior at home or in school or in need of additional support due to psycho-social concerns Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Skills and strategy lessons MathSaturday Institute from December through April Teachers confer with students to address specific academic needs Teachers work with students in small groups based on data Students receive AIS services during the school day to support readings in the content area Teachers confer with students to address specific academic needs. Teachers work with students in small groups based on data Conflict resolution, social skills, play therapy, feeling identification/expression, identification of coping skills Small group, individual Students receiveAISservices during the school day to support readings in the content area During the school day 2018-19 CEP 35  Parent or teacher referral 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 61 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school liaison is tracking and providing intervention and support services for students living in temporary housing. The liaison will determine what services they are currently receiving to determine additional comprehensive support. The liaison will determine transportation options for students. P.S. 506 can offer comprehensive medical, dental and mental health services within the building provided by Lutheran Health, as well as after school programs such as Center for Family Life. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. - 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school’s hiring practice is guided by our instructional needs and goals. We hire teachers who are certified to teach English Language Learners as well as Students with Disabilities. All new teachers have been paired with mentors who give them ongoing support in many areas. For example, they provide support with classroom management, planning targeted instruction, as well as engaging students in learning. New teacher meetings are offered regularly so that they have an opportunity to share concerns and ideas around improving instruction. Our professional development plan includes opportunities for all teachers to participate in a variety of teacher teams and workshops. These workshops assist them in improving their practice through planning and implementing the CCLS in all subjects. For example, teacher teams are identifying and introducing different supports and tools for students so that they can complete rigorous CCLS-aligned tasks. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will be offered many different types of professional development workshops including topics such as incorporating UDL strategies, integrating close reading strategies, implementing CCLS instructional shifts, understanding characteristics of text complexity and Lexile levels, and unpacking the components and elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching (DFT). In addition, teachers will participate in vertical teams and committees that help identify best practices in literacy and math that are aligned to the CCLS. Teachers will also have the opportunity to observe these best practices during inter-visitations scheduled throughout the year. The paraprofessionals will participate in workshops with the teacher and grade to which they are assigned. In addition, they will also participate in workshops specifically targeting paraprofessional duties. These workshops will include conferencing and organizing the data collected during student conferences and selecting materials that 2018-19 CEP 39  support students with special needs. Paraprofessionals will also be given a choice to select workshops that address their specific needs. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. - 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). - Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents are invited to a kindergarten orientation meeting in June before their child begins elementary school. Parents are given general information about the school, as well as expectations for kindergarten students. Parents are also offered a resource packet to begin preparing their children for elementary school. When the school year begins, we host workshops and open house events. Kindergarten parents are encouraged to attend these activities. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. This year, we will continue to create a MOSL Committee. The team will be comprised of teachers in grades K-5, as well as the administration. The team’s function will be to determine assessment measures that will be used to judge progress. The team will also determine a professional development plan will be designed to address the use of assessment and its implication for instruction as a result of the assessment selected to measure students’ progress and growth. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 684,715.00 73,324.00 33,742.00 5,158,541.00 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5:AIS program before school / Saturday program, books to be used for program Section 5: professional development Section5: before school / Saturday programs 7,089.00 X X Section 5: After school program,; workshops 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 2018-19 CEP 41  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent and family engagement policy that will establish expectations and objectives for meaningful parent and family involvement in the school community. PS 506, in compliance with Section 1116 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent and family engagement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 506 will support parents and family members of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children;  fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community, with the meaningful involvement of parents and family members, will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent and family engagement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents and family members and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent and Family Engagement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent and Family Engagement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents and family members in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage all parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I 1% set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to supplement parent and family engagement activities, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parental involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy and the School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.;  conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44   host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 31st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1116 and other applicable sections under ESSA;  schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;  translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee;  supporting or hosting Family Day events;  establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training and use of technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by:  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 506, in compliance with the Section 1116 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 45  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  using academic learning time efficiently;  respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;  implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 31st of each school year for parents and family members of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;  arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents, and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 46   assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend);  sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community;  supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents and family members;  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent and Family Engagement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age;  check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);  set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;  promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 CEP 47   attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities  complete my homework and submit all assignments on time;  follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  show respect for myself, other people and property;  try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The first year that we were a part of the NYC Community Schools was in 2017. As such, we worked closely with our CBO Director, Ms. Onserud, regarding attendance. She participated in our attendance meetings. Two of our teachers work for Center for Family Life before and after school and they became an integral part of the attendance team. Using the Success Mentor model, they identified and supported some of our chronically absent students. We noted an improvement in attendance for the students that they worked with. This year, we want to expand that model so that many more people become success mentors as it was a successful pilot. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of chronically absent students will decrease to 14 percent as measured by our monthly attendance reports. By June 2019, the percentage of parents participating in adult education programs and community events will increase by 10 percent. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Our chronically absent students struggle academically. We hope to see improved academic outcomes with improved attendance. Increased parent engagement creates a stronger community where parents turn to our school and partners as a resource to help with a variety of needs. Last year, we partnered with CFL, and city agencies to bring legal resources to our family. We will continue to identify needs for our families and the resources that will support them. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 2018-19 CEP 49  Center for Family Life Chronically Absent Students Success Mentor Action Team Center for Family Life Parents Adult Education Classes (ENL; Parenting) Community Engagement (Summer Resources / Community Forum) By June 2019, the percentage of chronically absent students will decrease to 14% as measured by our monthly attendance reports. By June 2019, the percentage of parents participating in adult education programs and community events will increase by 10%. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Three focus areas for the next year include: 1. to increase our attendance rate CFL is providing funding for two teachers in PS 506 and two teachers and a para in PS 503 to be success mentors every morning for an hour each. 2. to bring additional support to lunch/recess periods. A CFL staff is covering all lunch/recess periods for both schools two days a week. 3. to continue integrating the school and CBO staffing working during and after the school day to create a seamless school community day and evening that includes meeting the educational needs of students and their parents as well as providing enrichment activities. Three teachers are working to monitor homework help during after school and one of the teachers will be doing guided reading with selected students from both schools during after school. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will 2018-19 CEP 50  2. 3. 4. lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. CBO Director will participate in SLT meeting, attendance meetings, community school forums and convenings. We will also hold weekly meetings to discuss goals. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. CBO Center for Family Life’s array of services include after school, summer day camp and Neighborhood evening, Saturday and summer programs, family counseling, employment services. It also includes a single stop with legal, financial counseling and benefit services, as well as an emergency food pantry. Other community partners include NYU Lutheran for health and mental health services, the Healing Center for counseling related to domestic violence and Grandma’s Love, and Blessing in a backpack for emergency food. We partner with the Office of Adult Continuing education to provide needed TESOL classes to the parents of our students. We also have partnerships with the Public Theatre, with theatre classes during evenings, and with Lincoln Center Boro Linc. 2. The Community School Team will be including the principals and assistant principals, SLT members, the CSD and key members of the CBO staff: the after school and day camp coordinator, the Neighborhood Center coordinator and the Beacon Director, the teachers who work both with the schools and the CBO. 3. We look forward to learning about the the new data sorter so that we can use it in our efforts to target students for specific interventions according to their need. While the Community School Team will create a holistic strategy to meet the various needs of the school, there needs to be a targeted approach to reach every student’s specific need. 2018-19 CEP 51  Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Teacher leaders collaborate with CFL to improve academic outcomes during extended learning time and coordinate all program integration and logistics. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The goals, including lowering the number of chronically absent students and increasing parental involvement, are ongoing and will be monitored on weekly and/or monthly basis. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We are proposing a Robotics and Coding enrichment Saturday school program for all of our ELLs in grades 3 - 5. Students will be learning language and content through a STEAM aligned curriculum created by Lego Education and Code.Org. Today’s elementary students are tomorrow’s creative problem-solvers, and we would like to equip them with the necessary STEAM knowledge and skills to be innovative and imaginative thinkers. Also as per New York State guidelines, elementary schools must provide students with instruction in science and technology. LEGO Education helps make abstract STEM concepts tangible by taking teaching out of the textbooks and putting it into the hands of our ELL students. The LEGO Education WeDo 2.0 curriculum pack is built on Next Generation Science Standards and delivers key science content to third through fifth grade students. The curriculum facilitates and supports a clear, easy-to-follow journey through subjects, including: life-, physical-, earth- and space sciences, and engineering. The Committee on STEM Education (CoSTEM) are facilitating a cohesive national strategy, with new and repurposed funds, to increase the impact of federal investments in five areas: 1.) improving STEAM instruction in preschool through 12th grade; 2.) increasing and sustaining public and youth engagement with STEAM; 3.) improving the STEAM experience for undergraduate students; 4.) better serving groups historically underrepresented in STEAM fields; and 5.) designing graduate education for tomorrow's STEAM workforce. At P.S. 506, we would like to get ahead of this initiative by continuing STEAM education for our ELLs. This will help strengthen their content knowledge, leadership skills, ability to work in teams, as well as develop their academic language and vocabulary. P.S. 506 is currently participating in the SIGA grant. We are working with Lucia Perez-Medina to implement Advanced Literacy into our curriculum. As per Nonie K. Lesaux, reading and writing have become prerequisites for participation in nearly every aspect of day-to-day, 21st century life. Today, students needs to develop an increasingly complex set of advanced literacy skills and competencies in order to access social and economic opportunities. What counts as “literate” has changed dramatically over the last few decades. To be academically and personally successful in today’s literacy- and knowledge-based society and economy, each student needs to develop what we refer to as advanced literacy. Advanced literacy refers to the skills and competencies that enable communication, spoken and written, in increasingly diverse ways and with increasingly diverse audiences. Advanced literacy also promotes the understanding and use of text for a variety of purposes. Likewise they make way for participation in academic, civic, and professional communities, where knowledge is shared and generated. We believe this Saturday program will further promote Advanced Literacy by teaching science and technology in connection to what is being taught during the school day. The program will promote reading, writing, listening, and speaking through a small group environment with content in the center of all projects. This program will help prepare our ELLs for being successful and literate in today's society. We will be inviting all of our ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) in grades 3-5 to participate in 10 sessions on Robotics and Coding on Saturday. Our intention is to have approximately 10 licensed ENL/Bilingual pedagogues to teach the Lego 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Education and Code.Org curriculum. The program will run on Saturdays. Planning for staff will take place on November 17th The program for students will run on December 1, 8, 15; January 5, 12, 16; February 2, 9; March 2, 9, 1`6. Students will spend half of the time learning robotics, and the other half coding. More sessions will be scheduled pending budget. These dates are tentative. The program will be taught solely in English. A supervisor will be required to organize and supervise the student enrollment process, as well as supervise staff and evaluate program progress, and aid with the safe dismissal of students. The supervisor will be in charge of collecting attendance, and making outreach (in the parent's preferred language) to students who are frequently absent. A translator or the translation services phone line will be utilized to communicate with parents in their preferred languages. The supervisor will create a binder to maintain all records regarding the program, such as attendance sheets, emergency contact information, student rosters, program notification letters, etc. All program notification letters will be sent in the parents’ preferred languages. Letters will be either translated in-house or sent out for translation. The supervisor will also be the lead instructional facilitator organizing ongoing PD related to the program to support teachers. The supervisor will also track and evaluate the success of the program. Each classroom will be utilizing laptops for both the coding and the robotics portion of the curriculum. We possess Lego Education WeDo 2.0 Ready Go Classroom Packs. We have enough packs to ensure that each pair of students will have a set of bricks to build each robot and complete a project. Proper software and a full STEAM curriculum will also be included in the classroom packs. We will purchase additional kits if necessary.ENL/Bilingual teachers will be providing direct instruction through small group instruction with flexible groupings. The Robotics and Coding enrichment Saturday school program will consist of heterogeneous language proficiency groups divided by grade bands. ENL teachers will be responsible for providing all instruction during the program to their students.Home language support will be provided through the use of bilingual glossaries and picture support where applicable. Bilingual picture dictionaries will be available for student use. Parents will be invited to participate in coding and robotics with their children. They will be provided training and support from one of our teachers. In addition, we will also have a STEAM fair where students will showcase their projects for parents. P.S. 506 hosted the Saturday Robotics and Coding program during the 2017-2018 school year. We invited all ELL students in grades 3-5. From past data, we noticed that our students were struggling with academic language and scored low on the reading and writing components of the NYSESLAT. In the program, students were exposed naturally to academic language that they had to utilize to complete projects using all of their receptive and productive skills. After analyzing the 2018 NYSESLAT results, we noticed that the students who participated in the Saturday Robotics and Coding program either showed improvement or did not drop NYSESLAT levels. All students scored either Transitioning, Expanding, or Commanding on the exam. Five students scored at the commanding proficiency level. Twenty students increased by at least one proficiency level. With the NYSESLAT exam having a more content focus, science and technology instruction helped to boost their academic language acquisition, which translated to their 2018 NYSESLAT scores. Because of our partnership through the SIGA grant to Advanced Literacy, as well as our data showing positive NYSESLAT results, we are proposing to continue the Saturday Robotics and Coding program for our ELLs. In first grade, we have noticed that ELL students score low on the listening modality of the NYSESLAT. Out of the 54 ELLs in first grade, 38 scored poorly on listening. Students showed progress on the speaking modality. Out of the 54 ELLs, 33 of them were Entering or Emerging when they entered Kindergarten at P.S. 506. In order to improve our ELL's developing listening skills, we propose a first grade violin program. Research states that children who are musically trained are better at observing pitch changes in speech and have a better vocabulary and reading ability than children who did not receive music training. The researchers concluded that the effects of music instruction improves listening, learning, memory, attention and literacy skills. 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information These are all skills that our first grade ELL students need in order to succeed in their core content areas. Violin instruction will definitely improve their listening skills and ability to follow directions. We will be inviting all of our ELLs (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) in first grade to participate in 29 sessions of violin. Our intention is to have approximately 1 licensed violin pedagogue to teach the music class. Students will learn not only how to play the violin, but also how to read music. The program for students will run every Wednesday during the lunch period, starting on November 14 until June 5. More sessions will be scheduled pending budget. These dates are tentative. The program will be taught solely in English. A supervisor will be not be required, as the program will be during the school day. All program notification letters will be sent in the parents’ preferred languages. Letters will be either translated in-house or sent out for translation. Parents will be invited to a violin recital in the spring to view student progress. Students will be using the violins already purchased from previous years. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers will receive staff development at no cost to the program through workshops provided by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center and The Department of English Language Learners. In addition, professional development will be provided by the school on a weekly basis focusing on: differentiating instruction, analyzing data, questioning and questioning techniques, building academic language/ Tier II and Tier III vocabulary, moving students across reading levels, planning thoughtful instruction as well as scaffolds, infusing the New Generation Science Standards into the curriculum, preparing our ELLs for the 21st century through STEAM, and implementing best practices for ELLs. These workshops will be provided by the ENL Coordinator and ENL teacher leaders, consultants, and the administrative staff. Professional development sessions will take place during the extended day on Mondays and Tuesdays as well as at weekly grade meetings. In order to prepare all staff to teach the Lego Education program, we plan to use per session funding to hire our science teacher. Teachers will be provided with an initial training to prepare them to teach the Coding/Robotics curriculum, and then continue to receive year long support, which includes in-person visits and lessons from the science teacher. Teachers will learn how to use the Lego robotics kits, and how to teach the curriculum with appropriate scaffolds to reach all students.Professional development will be ongoing pending funding. Teachers will also be sent to training provided by Code.org when sessions are offered. Teachers who attend the training will turnkey information to colleagues during the extended day on Mondays and Tuesdays. Professional development sessions on Mondays will be from 2:40 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. and on Tuesdays from 3:20 p.m. – 3:55 p.m. All staff members providing professional development sessions are required to submit agendas and attendance sheets to the secretary. The secretary will be in charge of maintaining all records including agendas and attendance sheets for professional development workshops offered. They will be kept in the main office in a binder titled Professional Development 2018-2019. 2018-19 CEP 56 Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental engagement activities and workshops are created based on parental needs. The Parent Coordinator sends out surveys inventorying the needs of parents, as well as taking notes during the School Leadership Team meetings. All communication is done in the parents’ preferred languages. The workshops are also presented with translators present to ensure all parental needs are accommodated.Title III program related information will be translated and distributed to parents of ELLs via letters, which will be sent home with the students. In addition, phone calls, providing important information regarding the school, will go home in the native language via School Messenger. Parent Workshops and Meet and Greet meetings (approximately 6 sessions) will be conducted by the ENL teachers, teacher leaders, the parent coordinator, and the administrative staff and translation services will be provided as needed. We will focus on the following topics; however, topics may change depending on parental needs and/or requests: September: Reviewing school expectations October: MyOn online book introduction to parents November: Leader In Me - Leadership, Culture and Character Development December: Understanding and Preparing for the State English Language Arts State Assessment January : Understanding and Preparing for the State Math Assessment February: Understanding and Preparing for the NYSESLAT March: TBA based on parent choice April: TBA based on parent choice May: TBA based on parent choice June: TBA based on parent choice More workshops will be added to the schedule as parents voice their needs. Workshops take place monthly after family fun days as well as Tuesday afternoons during parent engagement time from 2:45 - 3:30 pm. Any costs will not be compensated using Title III program funding since the workshop take place during extended school time.The parent coordinator will continue to organize a Lending Library for parents consisting of native language and English read-aloud books to promote literacy at home. Parents will be invited to the first session of the Robotics & Coding Saturday program to meet with the program coordinator and administrator to discuss the expectations and rules of the program. Parents will also be invited to the final session of the program for the Robotics & Coding Showcase. Students will present their projects and teach their parents about robotics and coding. Parents will be notified via letters in their preferred language of choice. The Parent Coordinator will be responsible for organizing parent workshops, maintaining agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in parents' preferred languages in a binder kept in the main office. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 20 School Name P.S. 506 Borough Brooklyn School Number 506 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dana Parentini Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yulya Kravchik Teacher/Subject Area Angela Hebert/Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Tiffany Cottone/3rd Grade Teacher Related-Service Provider Anna Blaustein/IEP Teacher Superintendent Karina Constantino Assistant Principal Ellie Vargas/Maria Grajales Coach NA School Counselor Luz Cuervo Parent Norma Mendez Parent Coordinator Christy Wang Field Support Center Staff Member Christine Etienne Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 4 0 9 6 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 59  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 836 Total number of ELLs 254 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.38% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Mandarin Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 2 3 K 1 Spanish 2015-16 1 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 1 0 0 3 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In the past, P.S. 506 used the DRA-2 to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs. The DRA-2 provided data on reading engagement, accuracy, oral reading fluency, and comprehension. The DRA Word Analysis gave us insights on how our ELLs attend to and work with the various components of spoken and written words including: phonological awareness, metalanguage, letter/high frequency word recognition, phonics, and structural analysis and syllabication. For the upcoming 2017-2018 school year, P.S. 506 will be switching to the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (F&P). F&P is an accurate and reliable tool to identify the instructional and independent reading levels of all students and document student progress through one-on-one formative and summative assessments. It provides teachers with precise 2018-19 CEP 60  tools and texts to observe and quantify specific reading behaviors, and then interpret and use that data to plan meaningful instruction. During the 2016-2017 school year, DRA-2 data helped us monitor the literacy growth of our ELLs over time. In the future, F&P will be utilized to track the literacy development of our ELLs. Teachers also use running records, student conferences, and classroom observations to assess the literacy progress of ELLs. The data from our literacy assessments provides teachers information that helps them determine each student’s independent reading level and identifies next steps. The F&P Class Profile provides the focus for instruction, and helps teachers differentiate instruction by grouping students based on their needs. The data allows teachers to make effective teaching decisions in order to help students increase reading levels. The F&P is administered three times a year. After each assessment period, the data is closely monitored and programs are reorganized if necessary to address students’ needs. ENL teachers closely monitor F&P results, and create groups and teaching points to address student needs. P.S. 506 has a Spanish Dual Language program in Kindergarten, First, and Second grades. The Dual Language classroom uses the English F&P kit as well as the Spanish F&P kit to monitor not only English literacy progress, but also Spanish growth. Utilizing the Spanish F&P kit ensures that every student is making progress in acquiring the skills necessary to become an independent reader and writer in both Spanish and English. Teachers share the results in conferences with parents and students. Teachers use the results from F&P to tailor instruction to meet the literacy needs of each student. The Spanish Dual Language classrooms also utilize Estrellita and/or Palabras a Su Paso for word study instruction. Estrellita is a foundational skills program. It utilizes a syllabic approach to blending and segmentation, which systematically builds upon itself. The purpose of the program is to bridge the gap from non-reader to reader in a short period of time relative to grade level. In first grade and above, Estrellita accelerates children through the decoding process in 6-8 weeks. Kindergarten children read within four to nine months. Palabras a Su Paso is an advance word study program. It is a hands-on approach to Spanish word study that teaches students to look closely at words to discover letter-sound correspondences, spelling patterns, syllable stress system, and spelling-meaning connections of Spanish orthography. Both word study programs have ongoing assessments to track student progress. Students learn the skills that are right for them in small differentiated groups. Grouping is flexible to accommodate student needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers constantly use data from formative, summative, and teacher created assessments to guide instructional planning for all students including ELLs. During inquiry, teacher grade teams examine student work from each class and work collaboratively to create next steps for instruction and alter the curriculum to support the needs of students. Teachers also work together to create scaffolds and access points for lessons to target each student during a lesson. Each grade works in cycles with different foci targeting various subjects to ensure scaffolding and student supports are present throughout the curriculum. Inquiry teams meet on Mondays during the extended day. Each grade also has a common prep to allow teachers to meet together weekly to plan for lessons, evaluate data, and discuss points of struggle. All ENL teachers also have a common prep with their grades to ensure that their instruction is aligned with the classroom teacher. ENL teachers participate in the planning and analyzing of data with an extra focus on supporting ELLs. They help to provide the linguistic demands that need to be addressed during a lesson in order for ELLs to be successful. They also help to create small groups and teaching points for differentiated instruction. They analyze writing samples with their supporting teachers, look at F&P/DRA-2 scores, and keep in mind a student’s English Language Proficiency level when making recommendations for lessons and scaffolds that need to be addressed. They also ensure that all four 2018-19 CEP 61  modalities are targeted during a lesson to provide ample opportunity for all students to participate in classroom discussions. All teachers were also introduced to the Bilingual Common Core Native Language Arts Progressions. Teachers explored the progressions, and learned how to use them in planning their lessons for ELLs in literacy. Teachers use the progressions to help further scaffold lessons for ELLs. Dual Language teachers utilize the Home Language Arts progressions as well to ensure proper scaffolds are in place for Spanish Language Learners. The Progressions help to make the Common Core Standards accessible for our ELLs and Spanish Language Learners. Grade 4 and 5 teachers in September are given time to examine the Item Analysis report to see where each student struggled during the ELA and Math state exams. This data is used by teachers to plan for instruction targeting the areas of difficulty. Grade 3 teachers give a mock ELA and Math exam to assist them in planning for ELA and Math instruction. ENL teachers sit in on these meetings to assist in the planning and creation of next steps for students. ENL teachers take note of which of their students struggled on which standard in order to address their needs in small groups. The EDAT tool is used to analyze how ELL students are fairing in all subject areas. All teachers of ELLs are given a snapshot of their students with the warning indicators and next steps for each student present from the EDAT tool. The data is used to track and monitor progress of high-risk ELLs. The EDAT tool is also utilized in deciding which students to include in before school and Saturday intervention programs. F&P is administered three times a year. Results are analyzed after each administration and reading small groups are planned for to address the needs of each student. Running records are given on a monthly basis to monitor progress in the movement of reading levels. Spanish Dual Language teachers utilize Estrellita’s online assessment tool and Palabras a Su Paso’s spelling inventory to track the progress in word study for all students learning Spanish. This data is utilized to form small groups, and instruction is catered to each group’s word work needs. The students are trained to request an assessment when they are ready to move levels, or the teacher will decide to assess progress after small group lessons. Kindergarten - 2nd grade teachers use Orton-Gillingham to provide English word study instruction. The program also utilizes assessments to track and monitor the progress of students in word study. Teachers use word study data both in English and Spanish to analyze how students are performing in reading and writing, and seeing how the gaps in literacy could be addressed during word work. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To identify baselines, progress and areas of need in reading, P.S. 506 utilizes the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (F&P). F&P is an accurate and reliable tool to identify the instructional and independent reading levels of all students and document student progress through one-on-one formative and summative assessments. It provides teachers with precise tools and texts to observe and quantify specific reading behaviors, and then interpret and use that data to plan meaningful instruction. The F&P is administered three times a year. Ongoing student progress in reading is done through informal running records administered by the teacher. The Dual Language classroom uses the English F&P kit as well as the Spanish F&P kit to monitor not only English literacy progress, but also Spanish growth. Utilizing the Spanish F&P kit ensures that every student is making progress in acquiring the skills necessary to become an independent reader and writer in both Spanish and English. The Spanish Dual Language classrooms also utilize the online Estrellita assessment and/or Palabras a Su Paso’s spelling inventory to assess orthography knowledge, and place students in appropriate groups. The Estrellita assessment is given at the beginning and end of a school year. The Palabras a Su Paso spelling inventory is administered once at the beginning of the school year. Ongoing progress is tracked using teacher observations during small group instruction, as well as built in 2018-19 CEP 62  formative assessments. P.S. 506 follows the Teacher’s College Units of Writing. Students are given a pre-and post-assessment for each writing unit. Teachers evaluate both pieces using a rubric and plan next steps for each student. Teachers of ELLs use NYSESLAT data in September to identify progress and areas of need for our English Language Learners. They use this data to provide scaffolds into the curriculum and plan for lessons. Grade 3 teachers administer a mock State ELA and Math exam that is used to drive instruction for students and pinpoint a student’s strength and weakness. Go Math unit exams are then given after every completed unit of study. Grade 4-5 teachers use State ELA, Math, and Science exam scores to plan for instruction. These tests provide a baseline of Common Core Learning Standards teachers need to target to ensure success in the future grade. Unit Math and Science exams are given to continue monitoring progress in those subject areas and plan for instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data assessments produce valuable information that is used to make curriculum decisions, direct future instruction, and improve instructional practices. Teachers use information from yearly summative data assessments to improve student learning and improve instructional practices. Summative assessment data are collected at the end of a chapter or unit; after instruction has taken place. Summative assessment data is obtained through a variety of means including tests, projects, and student portfolios. Each grade has a common prep to allow teachers to meet together weekly to plan for units of study, evaluate data, and discuss points of entry/scaffolds. All ENL teachers also have a common prep with their grades to ensure that their instruction is aligned with the classroom teacher. ENL teachers participate in the planning and analyzing of data with an extra focus on supporting ELLs. They help to provide the linguistic demands that need to be addressed during a unit in order for ELLs to be successful. They also help to create small groups and teaching points for differentiated instruction. They analyze writing samples (both baseline and post-assessments) with their supporting teachers, look at F&P/DRA-2 scores, and keep in mind a student’s English Language Proficiency level (NYSESLAT data) when making recommendations for lessons, classroom interventions, and scaffolds that need to be addressed during a unit of study. Next steps are created for each student that addresses the needs of the child to ensure future success. Grade 4 and 5 teachers in September are given time to examine the Item Analysis report to see where each student struggled during the ELA and Math state exams. This data is used by teachers to plan for instruction targeting the areas of difficulty. Grade 3 teachers give a mock ELA and Math exam to assist them in planning for ELA and Math instruction. ENL teachers sit in on these meetings to assist in the planning and creation of next steps for students. ENL teachers take note of which of their students struggled on which standard in order to address their needs in small groups. The EDAT tool is used to analyze how ELL students are fairing in all subject areas. All teachers of ELLs are given a snapshot of their students with the warning indicators and next steps for each student present from the EDAT tool. The data is used to track and monitor progress of high-risk ELLs. Teachers utilize the next steps suggestions in their lesson planning of units. The EDAT tool is also utilized in deciding which students to include in before school and Saturday intervention programs. F&P (both in English and Spanish) is administered three times a year. Results are analyzed after each administration and reading small groups are planned for to address the needs of each student. Running records are given on a monthly basis to monitor progress in the movement of reading levels. The Administrative cabinet meets with AIS teachers in September and looks at summative data (F&P, Standardizes Test Scores, etc.) to form AIS small groups. Student progress is monitored every six weeks, and groups are altered depending if a student continues to need the extra intervention, or if new students need to be added to a cycle based on new summative data. AIS teachers communicate both with the classroom teachers and the Administrative cabinet on the progress of students, and what 2018-19 CEP 63  scaffolds teachers can incorporate into their classrooms to aid in supporting the student. Teachers may also refer struggling students to the RtI team for further intervention if students show minimal progress despite the teacher’s attempt at daily conferring and implemented scaffolds. ENL teachers analyze NYSESLAT data in September to formulate small groups and recognize areas of strength and struggle for students. They also look at how students are progressing by comparing current NYSESLAT scores to previous year’s scores. If students dropped NYSESLAT levels, ENL teachers discuss the possible reasons for the drop, and what interventions must be put into place in order to ensure progress during the new school year. The EDAT tool also assists with the formation of groups and next steps. ENL teachers then meet with classroom teachers during common preps to disseminate this information and ensure consistency in teaching between the two teachers. Both teachers understand the English Acquisition needs of the student, and provide the same scaffolds across the curriculum. Both teachers also understand the strengths of the student and capitalize on those to ensure the student continues to grow. NYSESLAT scores are also used in the initial use of the Bilingual Common Core Native Language Arts Progressions. The progressions are divided into the four modalities, like the NYSESLAT, so students are placed into the appropriate groups initially based on their NYSESLAT results. The Progressions provide scaffolds/interventions for ELLs to make the Common Core Literacy standards accessible to all students while ensuring progress and success during a unit. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Response to Intervention (RtI) framework is used at P.S. 506 as an instructional model that aims at prevention and early intervention through a tiered system of instructional support. This includes levels of intervention and instruction that increase in duration and intensity over time; as students improve, measured by reliable and valid assessments (both formal and informal), the extra supports are removed. Instruction for ELLs in English language development is provided at the Tier 1 instructional level. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. This extra support can occur in the classroom, but also in separate settings with instruction focused on specific learning targets. The RtI team carefully analyzes the characteristics of each learner, and views their status as a language learner as an asset to draw upon. The RtI team attempts to build upon the linguistic capabilities students bring to the classroom and understand where challenges may lie. The RtI team at P.S. 506 consists of the building's administrators, AIS teachers, Speech therapists, ENL teachers, SETSS teachers, and other service providers. Each member possesses in depth knowledge of their field. The team has a systematic approach for examining how ELLs’ backgrounds and educational contexts (i.e., first and second language proficiency, educational history including bilingual models, immigration pattern, socioeconomic status, and culture) have an impact on their academic achievement in the classroom. To refer any student to the RtI, classroom teachers must fill out a form including data on the student and what attempts have been made to have the student progress. Here is a list of some of the data that is included on the RtI referral form: F&P/DRA-2 levels, ELA/Math scores, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL proficiency scores, writing samples, a description of the amount and type of ENL instruction being provided, etc. When ELLs are referred to the RtI, the team first examines the appropriateness of classroom instruction that is given by the classroom teacher, based on knowledge of individual student factors. The informal and formal assessments are analyzed when examining instruction and learning about the learner. When evaluating data, the RtI team examines how the child performs relative to peers of the same age, grade level, and English language proficiency. If an ELL student is flagged as at- risk or below-benchmark on any particular skill or competency (such as in math or literacy), the student receives targeted instructional support to bolster development in this area. This support is delivered in coordination with language support services. For example, when the data shows ELL students are below grade level in reading, they are pulled for extra guided reading instruction. They may also receive at risk SETTS, AIS, and Speech services if deemed necessary by the team. The ENL provider of the referred ELL is present during the intervention planning to provide input on the extent, if any, to which ENL instruction is needed during Tiers 2 and 3 interventions to ensure the student will benefit from the intervention. The classroom/referring teacher is also given specific strategies to try with the student for a specific time frame to watch for growth and progress. Each suggestion by the RtI team addresses a different concern that the child has according to the data provided by the referring teacher. Teachers work collaboratively when necessary to ensure the success of the implementation of the RtI plan for the student. After the allotted time has passed, a liaison to the teacher presents the new data on the child to see if progress has been made. If not, the RtI reconvenes and continues through the framework to suggest other 2018-19 CEP 64  interventions. Data drives all suggestions and instruction. Data is drawn from multiple sources to inform decisions, and multiple tools are used to uncover critical information. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The success of our ENL program is evaluated by monitoring the growth of ELL students as evidenced by the F&P kit, EDAT tool, informal assessments, New York State Standardized tests, and class work. Success is also evaluated by monitoring the increase in proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. Teachers utilize the RLAT report from ATS to monitor the progress over time of ELL students on the NYSESLAT. Our ELL students are consistently showing progress on the NYSESLAT. The amount of ELL students at the Entering level decreases from kindergarten through fifth grade, while the number of Expanding level ELL students increases. On the ELA, the amount of ELL students scoring at a Level 2 increases as ELL students move from third to fifth grade. On the New York State Math assessment, the amount of ELL students scoring at a Level 1 decreases as well as ELL students move from third to fifth grade, while the amount of Level 2 increases. The reading levels of ELL students continue to increase from small group instruction as is evidenced by the F&P. The data shows our ENL program is successful at helping students progress across proficiency levels; hence we will continue following the past curriculum. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL Coordinator prints out the RLAT report from ATS and gives a copy to each teacher of ELLs with only his/her students present. The ENL out of classroom teachers analyze the data together and plan for how to group their students and what skills need to be targeted for the year. They look at the Targets of Measure, Performance Indicators, and New Language Arts Progressions to assist them with this work. The ENL teachers then meet with their classroom partner teacher to dissect the rest of the summative data to plan for scaffolds, and differentiated lessons. The ELL Administrator also receives the RLAT data and dissects the progress with a focus on what are the areas of need. She meets with the ENL/DL/TBE teachers and speaks to them about how we could modify or alter the curriculum to support ELLs successfully. Teachers create plans for their students and meet with the ELL administer frequently to discuss progress. Changes are always made to programs if teachers and the Administrator notice that certain features are not working for students. The consistent tracking of data helps to drive decisions on whether or not to adjust a program, and what exactly to target. F&P data is analyzed three times a year both by teachers and the Administrative Cabinet. The F&P Online Management Tool is utilized by the whole staff to view the results of each administration. Teachers use the data to plan for small-differentiated literacy groups. Administrative staff uses the data to track if the reading curriculum is effectively meeting the needs of students. If it is not they plan for next steps with teacher feedback. Students who are not showing progress are tracked carefully and plans are created to ensure success. Students may also be added to AIS programs for additional reading support, or offered a space in the morning or Saturday programs. State ELA and Math Item Analysis reports are given to every teacher and service provider in Grades 4 – 5 by the Administrative Staff. Teachers are given time during the extended day to dissect the data and plan for units of study using the information. If students across the school are struggling, the Administrative Staff along with teachers discuss and dissect what is working and not working with the current curriculum and make necessary adjustments. Every classroom teacher has a data spreadsheet of his/her students located on Google Drive. Administrative staff and supporting service providers also have access to this data. F&P scores, Standardized State exam results, Math unit tests, Social Studies, Writing, and Science assessment data is all found on this data spreadsheet. This helps the whole school to track data for each student and adjust programs if necessary. This also gives transparency to where report card grades are created from 2018-19 CEP 65  during parent teacher conferences. Parents are generated a report of the scores for each marking period in an easy to read format. The EDAT tool data is accessed by the ELL Coordinator and shared with Administrative staff, and all teachers of ELLs. The data is analyzed to create next steps, alter programs, and offer additional supports to students. At the end of the school year, teachers are provided time for grade planning meetings during which they discuss the successes and struggles of their programs with each other and Administration. Adjustments are made for the following school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At P.S. 506 we currently offer the Free Standing English as a New Language program. Our Free Standing English as a New Language program includes two models: self contained and push-in / pull-out. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency receive 360 minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction and English Language. At P.S. 506 we have self contained classes in grades one through grade three. Students in these classes participate in ENL instruction through content and grade appropriate curriculum and State standard based literacy instruction that is modified through ENL techniques and methods. Students spend their instructional day with a certified ENL teacher who provides instruction in all curricular areas. Students in self contained classrooms are grouped heterogeneously in terms of proficiency levels. Self contained teachers are dually certified in ESOL and general education (Common Branch). We utilize the push-in/pull-out model at P.S. 506 for grades kindergarten through fifth. If ENL teachers are duly certified in ESOL and the content areas (Common Branch), they utilize the pull-out model. Teachers who are only certified in ESOL, push-in for Integrated ENL/ELA instruction and pull-out for stand alone ENL. The push-in/pull-out model involves ELLs in general education and special education classes. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency receive 360 minutes of push-in/pull out Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week from licensed ENL teachers. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA push-in/pull-out instruction provided by licensed ENL teachers. Students at the Commanding proficiency level receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA push-in instruction provided by licensed ENL teachers. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher on literacy and content area instruction. The reduced ratio of teacher to students allows for small group and individualized instruction. Through guided reading instruction, strategy lessons, interactive experiences, and individualized instruction, the students are led to interact, reflect, read, write, problem solve, develop and practice strategies, in the second language. As in the self contained classes, instruction is differentiated and supported by ENL methods in accordance with the Common Core Standards and the Bilingual Common Core New Language Arts Progressions. All mandated minutes and units of instruction are dictated by CR Part 154, and strictly followed by ENL teachers. Our self contained classes follow the block model. Each class travels together as a group. The students are mixed heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels) in the self contained classes. Instruction for the self contained classes, in all subject areas, is delivered by the same licensed ENL teacher. Our push-in model follows the block model as well. In grades kindergarten through five, non-self contained ELLs are placed in one or two classes throughout the grades in order to ensure an effective push-in model. ELL students in general education classes and special education classes are grouped heterogeneously. When licensed ENL teachers push in to provide services to these students, the students are placed in homogeneous groups based on English proficiency levels and reading levels in order to provide 2018-19 CEP 66  effective small group instruction. Entering and Emerging ELL students are serviced in one group , Transitioning and Expanding students are serviced in another group, and Commanding students in a third group or they join the Expanding students depending on their reading levels. All special education ELL students are always serviced in the setting recommended by their Individual Education Plan (IEP). In our pull-out model, dually certified teachers group students based on proficiency levels and provide the mandated amount of minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA instruction according to CR Part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.S. 506 will be opening a Mandarin Transitional Bilingual Education program for the 2017-2018 school year. The program will consist of about 25 Mandarin speaking students who have been identified as ELLs by the NYSITELL exam and whose parents have chosen TBE on the Parent Option Form. Transitional bilingual education (TBE) programs are designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. All instruction is Common Core aligned to accelerate student achievement. As ELLs develop English language skills, time in the home language decreases. When students reach commanding on the NYSESLAT, they are placed in a monolingual class in English with home language supports and mandated 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction by a licensed ENL teacher. In TBE programs, students transfer home language skills to English by spending instructional time primarily in the home language before steadily transitioning to English. At the entering level, TBE students are expected to receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. As a student’s English proficiency increases, more of his or her instructional day is spent learning in English. In the TBE program, the teacher must make several considerations when determining which language is best to teach certain concepts. The teacher must consider carefully the rigor of instruction, student familiarity with concepts in the home language and English, and the academic language required for using and mastering concepts. When determining the amount of home language and English language used in instruction, the teacher should consider a number of factors including, but not limited to students’ proficiency levels, educational backgrounds content knowledge, and home language literacy skills. This allows for differentiated instruction that meets the individual student’s needs. The TBE teacher is critical to ELLs’ transition from home language to English since she serves as a language model for both; therefore, she must demonstrate strong academic language proficiency when delivering instruction in either language. Successful TBE teachers help students cultivate a strong appreciation for reading. These teachers ensure that ELLs are familiar and comfortable with reading by helping them develop strong literacy skills in their home language first. The TBE teacher instructs students with various levels of content mastery and literacy development. The TBE teacher faces the additional challenge of gauging and instructing students with different proficiency levels in their home language as well as in English. As per CR Part 154.2, a minimum of two subject areas must be taught bilingually in the TBE classroom. At P.S. 506 Math and Science will be taught bilingually. 180 minutes of Home Language Arts instruction in Mandarin is also provided weekly. Our TBE program offers students accessibility to high quality rigorous Common Core (CCLS) aligned instruction that will prepare students for college and careers in the 21st century. One certified bilingual teacher services approximately 25 ELL students. There is a clear separation of printed languages in the TBE classroom. The teacher sets-up bulletin boards and displays student work using the English language on one side of the room and the target language on the other. The print in English is blue and for Mandarin in red. Bulletin boards for subject areas are also be color-coded. A multicultural bulletin board is used as an instructional tool when celebrating the students’ culture for the month. Home Language Arts instruction is provided solely in Mandarin with no code-switching by the teacher. The Preview-View-Review (PVR) model is utilized for the instruction of Mathematics and Science at P.S. 506. PVR is an effective strategy for ELLs where a preview of a lesson (including key vocabulary) is given in a student's 2018-19 CEP 67  L1 (Mandarin), the lesson follows in English, and then the information and vocabulary is reviewed again in a student's L1 (Mandarin). The teacher may alter which language she uses for which part of the PVR depending on the need of her students. The language of independent work and small group instruction is based on the English language proficiency level of the student. As the student gains English language acquisition, the amount of instruction provided in Mandarin decreases. All ELLs enrolled in the TBE program receive ENL instruction as a part of their academic schedule. Mandated minutes of target language instruction and ENL instruction is followed in accordance to CR Part 154. ELL students in the TBE program are of mixed ENL abilities. Our TBE class follows the block model. Each class travels together as a group. The students are mixed heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels). Instruction for the classes, in all subject areas, is delivered by the same Bilingual licensed teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. P.S. 506 has a Kindergarten - Second Grade Spanish Self-Contained 50-50 model Dual Language classrooms. The Dual Language (DL) program follows a model where English proficient students and ELLs of one common language (Spanish) learn together in two languages, English and the target language (Spanish). In our Dual Language classroom, students will not only develop new language skills and learn academic subjects in both languages, they will also practice and share language and culture with each other, making them bilingual, biliterate and bicultural. Our dual language programs offer students accessibility to high quality rigorous Common Core (CCLS) aligned instruction that will prepare students for college and careers in the 21st century. The DL program at PS 506 uses the 50-50 model. One certified bilingual teacher services approximately 14 Ells and 11 EPs for a total of 25 students. There is a clear separation of printed languages in the DL self-contained classroom. The teacher sets-up bulletin boards and displays student work using the English language on one side of the room and the target language on the other. The print in English is blue and for Spanish in red. Bulletin boards for subject areas are also be color-coded. A multicultural bulletin board is used as an instructional tool when celebrating the students’ culture for the month. Instructional tasks as well as instruction are sequential, not repetitive, and aligned to the CCLS. The materials chosen reflect the 50/50 model in quantity and quality. Administration has discussed that during instruction translation is avoided in order to ensure true immersion in each language. Instruction will be provided in two languages, so that students become proficient in reading, writing, and speaking in English and in Spanish. ELLs enrolled in DL programs receive ENL instruction as a part of their academic schedule. Students receive all subject area instruction in both the primary language and the target language. Students receive Home Language Arts instruction in Spanish. Mandated minutes of target language instruction and ENL instruction is followed in accordance to CR Part 154. ELL students in the DL program are of mixed ENL abilities. Our Dual Language classes follow the block model. Each class travels together as a group. The students are mixed heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels) in the Dual Language classes. Instruction for the classes, in all subject areas, is delivered by the same Bilingual licensed teacher. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Out of classroom ENL teachers plan schedules by looking at CR Part 154 and the RLAT to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels in each program model. Program cards noting the various proficiency groups, type of instruction (Stand alone versus Integrated), and location. This ensures that all students are receiving their mandates. At P.S. 506 we currently offer the Free Standing English as a New Language program. Our Free Standing English as a New 2018-19 CEP 68  Language program includes two models: self contained and push-in / pull-out. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency receive 360 minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction and English Language. Students at the Commanding level receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week. At P.S. 506 we have self contained classes in grades one through grade three. Students in these classes participate in ENL instruction through content and grade appropriate curriculum and State standard based literacy instruction that is modified through ENL techniques and methods. Students spend their instructional day with a certified ENL teacher who provides instruction in all curricular areas. Students in self contained classrooms are grouped heterogeneously in terms of proficiency levels. Self contained teachers are dually certified in ESOL and general education (Common Branch). We utilize the push-in/pull-out model at P.S. 506 for grades kindergarten through fifth. If ENL teachers are duly certified in ESOL and the content areas (Common Branch), they utilize the pull-out model. Teachers who are only certified in ESOL, push-in for ELA instruction and pull-out for stand alone ENL. The push-in/pull-out model involves ELLs in general education and special education classes. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels of proficiency receive 360 minutes of push-in/pull out Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week from licensed ENL teachers. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding proficiency levels receive 180 minutes of Intergrated ENL/ELA push-in/pull-out instruction provided by licensed ENL teachers. Students at the Commanding level receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction per week.The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher on literacy and content area instruction. The reduced ratio of teacher to students allows for small group and individualized instruction. Through guided reading instruction, strategy lessons, interactive experiences, and individualized instruction, the students are led to interact, reflect, read, write, problem solve, develop and practice strategies, in the second language. As in the self contained classes, instruction is differentiated and supported by ENL methods in accordance with the Common Core Standards. All mandated minutes and units of instruction are dictated by CR Part 154, and strictly followed by ENL teachers. Our self contained classes follow the block model. The students are mixed heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels) in the self contained classes. Instruction for the self contained classes in all subject areas is delivered by the same licensed ENL teacher. Our push-in model follows the block model as well. In grades kindergarten through five, non-self contained ELLs are placed in one or two classes throughout the grades in order to ensure an effective push-in model. ELL students in general education classes and special education classes are grouped heterogeneously. When licensed ENL teachers push in to provide services to these students, the students are placed in homogeneous groups based on English proficiency levels and reading levels in order to provide effective small group instruction. Entering and Emerging ELL students are serviced in one group and Transitioning and Expanding students are serviced in another group. All special education ELL students are always serviced in the setting recommended by their Individual Education Plan (IEP). In our pull-out model, dually certified teachers group students based on proficiency levels and provide the mandated amount of minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated ENL/ELA instruction according to CR Part 154. The DL program at PS 506 uses the 50-50 model. One certified bilingual teacher services approximately 14 Ells and 11 EPs for a total of 25 students. There is a clear separation of printed languages in the DL self-contained classroom. The teacher sets-up bulletin boards and displays student work using the English language on one side of the room and the target language on the other. The print in English is blue and for Spanish in red. Bulletin boards for subject areas are also be color-coded. A multicultural bulletin board is used as an instructional tool when celebrating the students’ culture for the month. Instructional tasks as well as instruction are sequential, not repetitive, and aligned to the CCLS. The materials chosen reflect the 50/50 model in quantity and quality. Administration has discussed that during instruction translation is avoided in order to ensure true immersion in each language. Instruction will be provided in two languages, so that students become proficient in reading, writing, and speaking in English and in Spanish. ELLs enrolled in DL programs receive ENL instruction as a part of their academic schedule. Students receive all subject area instruction in both the primary language and the target language. Students receive Home Language Arts instruction in Spanish. Mandated minutes of target language instruction and ENL instruction is followed in accordance to 2018-19 CEP 69  CR Part 154. ELL students in the DL program are of mixed ENL abilities. As per CR Part 154.2, a minimum of two subject areas must be taught bilingually in the TBE classroom. At P.S. 506 Math and Science will be taught bilingually. 180 minutes of Home Language Arts instruction in Mandarin is also provided weekly. One certified bilingual teacher services approximately 25 ELL students. There is a clear separation of printed languages in the TBE classroom. The teacher sets-up bulletin boards and displays student work using the English language on one side of the room and the target language on the other. The print in English is blue and for Mandarin in red. Bulletin boards for subject areas are also be color-coded. A multicultural bulletin board is used as an instructional tool when celebrating the students’ culture for the month. Home Language Arts instruction is provided solely in Mandarin with no code-switching by the teacher. The Preview-View-Review (PVR) model is utilized for the instruction of Mathematics and Science at P.S. 506. PVR is an effective strategy for ELLs where a preview of a lesson (including key vocabulary) is given in a student's L1 (Mandarin), the lesson follows in English, and then the information and vocabulary is reviewed again in a student's L1 (Mandarin). The teacher may alter which language she uses for which part of the PVR depending on the need of her students. The language of independent work and small group instruction is based on the English language proficiency level of the student. As the student gains English language acquisition, the amount of instruction provided in Mandarin decreases. All ELLs enrolled in the TBE program receive ENL instruction as a part of their academic schedule. Mandated minutes of target language instruction and ENL instruction is followed in accordance to CR Part 154. ELL students in the TBE program are of mixed ENL abilities. All teachers are provided the RLAT report for their individual classes. The RLAT report guides teachers to know how many minutes students are required to receive in ENL and HLA (if applicable). They follow the guidelines set by CR Part 154.2 once they know the proficiency levels of their students. Their program cards clearly reflect the mandates. The ELL Administrator reviews the program cards of ALL ENL, DL, and TBE teachers to ensure proper mandates are being met. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content in the Freestanding English as a New Language is taught in English using ENL methodologies of teaching. Various instructional approaches and methods are used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Special attention is paid to vocabulary and language development when creating lesson plans. Language functions and structures are included. Scaffolds and principles of UDL are utilized to differentiate instruction for various ELL proficiency levels. The Bilingual Common Core Language New Language Arts Progressions are utilized in helping to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Dual Language program, all content areas are taught in Spanish and English. Home Language Arts is provided in Spanish. The DL teacher uses visuals, graphic organizers, sentence frames, word walls, etc. to foster language development in the target language and English to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Bilingual Common Core Language New and Home Language Arts Progressions are utilized in helping to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the TBE program, Math and Science are taught in Mandarin and English using the PVR model. Home Language Arts is provided in Mandarin. All other subject areas are taught in English. The TBE teacher uses visuals, graphic organizers, sentence frames, word walls, etc. to foster transition from the target language into English to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students have ample resources to use in the native language as a support in their transition into English. The Bilingual Common Core Language New and Home Language Arts Progressions are utilized in helping to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 70  P.S. 506 uses Spanish F&P, Spanish Go Math/Investigations, Estrellita, formal and informal assessments to evaluate students in their home language throughout the year. Assessments are used to drive instruction and ensure students are acquiring the target language. For the TBE Mandarin program, teachers translate the assessments into Mandarin to evaluate progress throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our instructional plan for Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) is as follows: SIFE students will be placed in an age appropriate grade. After orientation, parents will have the opportunity to meet the supervisor of that grade, and meet the ENL Coordinator, Yulya Kravchik, to discuss the educational plan for the student. The goal is to provide students with differentiated lessons that highlight student strengths to support areas of need. With this goal in mind, our SIFE population will receive the following support: • Small group reading and writing instruction at the students’ ability level both in reading and language • Participation in the before school and/or Saturday program • Teachers will create and review their lessons with careful consideration to the SIFE student need and modify instruction where needed • Teachers will provide individual and guided support in literacy and content areas. • An ENL teacher will push-in/pull-out to provide literacy assistance and language development support aimed specifically at working with students at their ability levels through Standalone ENL or Integrated ENL/ELA. SIFE ELL students may be placed into either self contained ENL classrooms or general education classrooms that receive language support from a push-in/pull-out licensed ENL teacher. The ENL teacher collaborates and communicates with the general education or special education teacher in order to ensure the student's needs are met. b. Our instructional plan for newcomers is as follows: Students identified, through their home language survey, are eligible for testing and the administration of the NYSITELL, within ten days of registering. In the case of students coming from other city schools, a verification of testing is done through ATS. Students categorized as Entering and/or Emerging are provided with 360 minutes of Standalone ENL and Integrated instruction per week. Students who scored Transitioning and Expanding are provided with 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction. Support for these students is given in the following: • Participation in before school and/or Saturday program. • National Geographic Reach is used as a resource in the classroom to provide support. • Classroom libraries are leveled and contain varied genres. • All ELLs are held to the Common Core State Standards. • Instructional programs use materials that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. • On-going formal and informal assessments are provided to assure that students’ achievement is periodically measured. • Small groups and individualized instruction is based on assessments. . Participation in the Imagine Learning Program. c and d. Our instructional plan for Developing and Long Term English Language Learners: The school’s academic intervention team, ENL service providers and teachers will analyze students’ NYSESLAT scores and other assessments to identify academic strengths and needs. Teachers will plan and modify instruction to best meet the needs of our Developing and Long Term English language Learners. 2018-19 CEP 71  To meet the needs of our Developing English Language Learners we propose the following: • Standalone ENL and integrated ENL/content-area instruction. • Classroom libraries are leveled and contain varied genres. • All ELLs are held to the Common Core State Standards. • Instructional programs use materials that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. • On-going formal and informal assessments are provided to assure that students’ achievement is periodically measured. • Small groups and individualized instruction is based on assessments. • Participation in the before school and/or Saturday program To meet the needs of our Long Term English Language Learners we propose the following: • Analysis of the NYSESLAT, ELA and other assessments to monitor testing history and track progress. • Attendance records are reviewed for interruption of instruction and services. • Scores obtained from the citywide, state and other assessments are reviewed for patterns. • Parent conferences are held several times a year to monitor home study and academic practices. • Teacher assessments, conferences and writing samples are assessed to identify areas of strengths and needs. • Small group reading and writing instruction at the students’ ability level. • Participation in the before school and/or Saturday program. • Teachers will create and review their lessons with careful consideration to the student's need and modify instruction where needed • Teachers will provide individual and guided support in literacy and content areas. • An ENL teacher will push-in/pull-out to provide literacy assistance and language development support aimed specifically at working with students at their ability levels through Standalone ENL or Integrated ENL/ELA. • Professional development will be provided for all teachers on modifying and differentiating instruction to best support our ELLs. • Assessments, on a six to eight week cycle, will be implemented to monitor student progress. • Decisions will be made whether to continue intervention services, modify the instructional plan or refer students to the RtI team for formal evaluation and other services. e. To meet the needs of our Former English Language Learners we propose the following: Students who achieve language proficiency, based on the NYSESLAT, receive academic intervention services by the ENL teachers through Integrated ENL/ELA. Literacy ENL providers work with these children, differentiating instruction during the literacy periods. Parents of these students are given the opportunity to enroll their children in a before school tutorial program and/or the Saturday Academy program. These programs provide continuing ENL, literacy and mathematics support for learners who may be at risk of not meeting promotional standards. These students will continue to receive, for two years, testing accommodations for ELLs as based on the New York State testing requirements. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We currently have an Integrated Co-teaching Kindergarten, First, Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth grade class; a licensed ENL teacher services the ELLs. In addition, we have 12:1:1 bridge classes in grades K, 1, 2, 3 and 4. Services for our special education students are provided by our push-in/pull-out ENL teachers. The ENL teachers work collaboratively with special education teachers in the 12:1:1 and ICT classrooms to review the goals of each student as indicated on their Individualized Education Plan. Here are the grade-level materials teachers of English Language Learners with Special Needs (ELL-SWDs) use that provide both access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development: Reading: New York Journeys Program (which includes a reading anthology, big books, write-in readers, leveled guided reading books, vocabulary cards, projectable stories, assessments, charts, and focus walls). The guided reading books match the 2018-19 CEP 72  stories in the anthology in order to reinforce the concepts and vocabulary presented in the unit. Guided reading books specified for ELL students are included with each unit in addition with labels to make vocabulary comprehensible and are scaffolded using simpler sentence structures. ELL students also read books at their appropriate reading levels and participate in guided strategy lessons. Journeys has special ELL-SWDs write-in readers that offer below grade level texts that help support the unit of study and reinforce content, sight words, and vocabulary. Writing: Teacher's College Writing Workshop (differentiated writing paper, charts with visuals, mentor read aloud texts, shared/interactive writing pieces, teacher written and student written model pieces, sentence starters are utilized). Science: FOSS kits are utilized. Teachers develop specific content vocabulary flash cards to use for instruction and to place on the word walls in order to scaffold FOSS lessons. Students perform experiments, read books on the topic, watch videos, discuss, and write about the topics. Constant exposure to vocabulary through various portals such as video, books, etc. helps students to acquire specific academic content language. Social Studies: Passport to Social Studies core curriculum is utilized. It is a comprehensive K–5 curriculum designed to engage and motivate every student. Through the stories of the intriguing people, exciting places, and fascinating events that make social studies relevant to their lives, students gain a global perspective. They also learn the social studies themes and skills they need to become informed, participating citizens who consider diverse points-of-view, use critical thinking skills, and are active in their communities. The program’s content provides rigor and depth in an easy-to-read, highly visual format that instantly connects with all types of learners. Reading Skill development and reinforcement organized around a Big Idea and What to Know Essential Questions is core to the pedagogy. Because students also learn through interaction, the engaging hands-on activities and technology explorations in the Passport to Social Studies program provide the high-interest level tools to foster that connection. Mentor texts, movies, and vocabulary cards are utilized to make the material more comprehensible for ELL-SWD students. Math: Go Math (Grades 2-5) is used (manipulatives, vocabulary flash cards, projects, Math Journal pages, etc.) to support ELL-SWD students in learning the content material. GO Math! is a focused elementary math curriculum designed to meet the goals of the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. The Standards for Mathematical Practice are integrated throughout the program. Students and teachers are supported as they advance from concrete to abstract content through the use of models and Math Talk. The flexibility, comprehensiveness, and rigor of GO Math! provide personalized and adaptive 21st-century instruction to ensure success. Investigations (Grades K-1) is used (manipulatives, vocabulary flash cards, projects, Math Journal pages, etc.) to support ELL-SWD students in learning the content material. Investigations is a child-centered approach to teaching mathematics through engaging activities, discussions, and problem solving. Additional Intervention, Practice, and Extension activities are provided to meet the needs of all students. The Standards for Mathematical Practice are integrated throughout the program. Students and teachers are supported as they advance from concrete to abstract content through the use of models and Math Talk. The flexibility, comprehensiveness, and rigor of Investigations provides personalized and adaptive 21st-century instruction to ensure success. Robotics: P.S. 506 is working with Sunset Sparks to incorporate Lego Robotics and Coding into the curriculum. Students will work on culminating robotics projects in various content areas. Scaffolds are built into the projects to provide support for our ELL-SWD students. LEGO Education helps make abstract STEAM concepts tangible by taking teaching out of the textbooks and putting it into the hands of our ELL-SWD students. The LEGO Education WeDo 2.0 curriculum pack is built on Next Generation Science Standards and delivers key science content to kindergarten through fifth grade students. The curriculum facilitates and supports a clear, easy-to-follow journey through subjects, including: life-, physical-, earth- and space sciences, and engineering. Resources and materials support our ELLs with special needs. Classroom libraries are leveled appropriately and include a variety of reading genres. The push-in ENL teachers provide shared, guided and interactive lessons that support the skills and strategies addressed by the special education teacher. 2018-19 CEP 73  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWD population receives the following differentiated support and instruction: Small group reading and writing instruction at the students' ability level. Teachers create and review their lessons with careful consideration to the student's need and modify instruction where needed. Teachers provide individual and guided support in literacy and content areas. An ENL teacher pushes-in to provide literacy assistance and language development support aimed specifically at working with students at their ability levels. Inquiry cycles focus around ELL-SWDs and using data to determine student progress and next instructional steps. All ELL-SWDs are placed either in General Education, ICT, or 12:1:1 classrooms based on their IEP requirements. These ELLs receive ENL services, and/or related services depending on their IEP requirements. All ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At P.S. 506 we have various intervention programs for struggling ELLs in Math, ELA, and other content areas. All intervention programs are offered in English. For ELA and Math, all struggling below grade level ELL students participate in the before school and/or Saturday program. Revisions on students’ intervention plans are modified as needed. Progress is carefully tracked by the classroom teacher, ENL provider, and other licensed teachers providing support services. Targeted interventions for the ELA for all subgroups (Newcomer, Developing, Long Term, Former, and ELL-SWD): • Extended use of scaffolding methods during components of balanced literacy. Learners are supported through scaffolding of instruction that ensures that needed elements are in place before constructing meaning of the whole topic. Some examples are the usage of sentence prompts, charts accompanied by pictures and/or diagrams, vocabulary flash cards accompanied with definitions and pictures, etc. • Teachers further develop the acquired vocabulary and content through student conferences. • Small group reading and writing instruction at the students’ ability level both in reading and language. • Teachers create and review their lessons with careful consideration to the ELL students needs and modify instruction where needed. • Teachers provide individual and guided support in literacy and content areas. • An ENL teacher pushes-in/pulls-out to provide literacy assistance and language development support aimed specifically at working with students at their ability levels. Targeted interventions for Math for all subgroups (Newcomer, Developing, Long Term, Former, and ELL-SWD): • Small group math instruction at the students’ ability level both in math and language. • Teachers further develop the acquired vocabulary and content through student conferences. • Teachers create and review their lessons with careful consideration to the ELL students needs and modify instruction where needed. • Teachers provide individual and guided support in math. • An ENL teacher pushes-in/pulls-out to provide language development support aimed specifically at working with students at their ability levels. 2018-19 CEP 74  • Learners are supported through scaffolding of instruction that ensures that needed elements are in place before constructing meaning of the whole topic. Some examples are the usage of sentence prompts, charts accompanied by pictures and/or diagrams, vocabulary flash cards accompanied with definitions and pictures, etc. Targeted interventions for Science and Social Studies for all subgroups (Newcomer, Developing, Long Term, Former, and ELL-SWD): • Extended use of scaffolding methods during components of content area instruction. Learners are supported through scaffolding of instruction that ensures that needed elements are in place before constructing meaning of the whole topic. Some examples are the usage of sentence prompts, charts accompanied by pictures and/or diagrams, vocabulary flash cards accompanied with definitions and pictures, etc. • Small group content area instruction at the students’ ability level. • Teachers create and review their lessons with careful consideration to the ELL students needs and modify instruction where needed. • Teachers provide individual and guided support in the content areas. For all interventions, progress is tracked through formal and informal assessments. Teachers constantly reflect on the needs of the students and redirect lessons and small groups to tackle the needs of the student. If, however, these interventions do not seem to be adequately moving the student in any of the subject areas, the student is then referred to the RTI team, and then eventually the Pupil Personnel Team. The RtI team at P.S. 506 consists of the building's administrators, AIS teachers, Speech therapists, ENL teachers, SETTS teachers, and other service providers. Each member possess in depth knowledge of their field. The team has a systematic approach for examining how ELLs’ backgrounds and educational contexts (i.e., first and second language proficiency, educational history including bilingual models, immigration pattern, socioeconomic status, and culture) have an impact on their academic achievement in the classroom. To refer any student to the RtI, classroom teachers must fill out a form including data on the student and what attempts have been made to have the student progress. Here is a list of some of the data that is included on the RtI referral form: F&P levels, ELA/Math scores, NYSESLAT/LAB-R/NYSITELL proficiency scores, writing samples, a description of the amount and type of ENL instruction being provided, etc. When ELLs are referred to the RtI, the team first examines the appropriateness of classroom instruction that is given by the classroom teacher, based on knowledge of individual student factors. The informal and formal assessments are analyzed when examining instruction and learning about the learner. When evaluating data, the RtI team examines how the child performs relative to peers of the same age, grade level, and English language proficiency. If an ELL student is flagged as at- risk or below-benchmark on any particular skill or competency (such as in math or literacy), the student receives targeted instructional support to bolster development in this area. This support is delivered in coordination with language support services. For example, when the data shows ELL students are below grade level in reading, they are pulled for extra guided reading instruction. They may also receive at risk SETSS, AIS, and Speech services if deemed necessary by the team. The ENL provider of the referred ELL is present during the intervention planning to provide input on the extent, if any, to which ENL instruction is needed during Tiers 2 and 3 interventions to ensure the student will benefit from the intervention. The classroom/referring teacher is also given specific strategies to try with the student for a specific time frame to watch for growth and progress. Each suggestion by the RtI team addresses a different concern that the child has according to the data provided by the referring teacher. Teachers work collaboratively when necessary to ensure the success of the implementation of the RtI plan for the student. After the allotted time has passed, a liaison to the teacher presents the new data on the child to see if progress has been made. If not, the RtI reconvenes and continues through the framework to suggest other interventions. Data drives all suggestions and instruction. Data is drawn from multiple sources to inform decisions, and multiple tools are used to uncover critical information. The Pupil Personnel Team is composed of the Principal, Assistant principals, school psychologist, guidance counselors, ENL Coordinator and the AIS provider of the grade. The PPT team meets once a month to discuss academic interventions for the long term ELLs, ELL-SWDs, as well as any struggling ELLs. They make decisions whether to continue intervention services, 2018-19 CEP 75  modify the instructional plan, or refer students for formal evaluation and other services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are planning on introducing and utilizing Lego robotics in all classrooms throughout the content areas to provide project based learning to all students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs participate in the violin program, student council, student Lighthouse team, Mighty Milers, before school program, Saturday Academy, etc. The before-school program and Saturday academy was created to help support struggling ELLs and further push those who are on level. In these programs language is developed and literacy skills are strengthened. Students are prepared for the ELA, Math and NYSESLAT exams. These programs are used as both an intervention and enrichment. Students are placed into small groups based on need. Our ENL teachers provide additional literacy support for former ELL students to ensure their continued academic success. All ELLs will be offered an opportunity to participate in Lego robotics programs with their classrooms. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Resources and Instructional Materials Used to Support ELLs: Classroom libraries are leveled appropriately and include culturally motivating books as part of each classroom library. All instructional materials are age appropriate for ELLs. Literacy is instruction is presented through meaningful literature which actively engages students to participate and apply strategies learned. Before initiating a unit of study, the general education teachers and ENL teachers who are responsible for delivering instruction to ELLs meet to plan the teaching points for the unit. Careful consideration is given to the specific skills that readers should master on their given independent reading level. As the mini-lesson takes place, ENL teachers provide differentiated instruction to individual students or small groups in order to reinforce the mini lessons or strategy lessons. Guided reading is provided using multiple copies of stories, for example: Guided Reading sets from the Journeys program (ELL Guided Reading Program), Rigby, and National Geographic Reach are used to teach different literacy skills. Students maintain book baggies with several books at their level that the ENL teacher has assisted them in selecting (beginners). Children at the Transitioning and Expanding levels of proficiency, who are able to manage their own book selection, are encouraged to do so. Differentiation of instruction to meet the language needs of students is achieved through techniques and strategies the ENL teachers use. Our ENL teachers use the program National Geographic Reach. It is a program that includes guided reading materials, big books, videos and mp3s for the students to listen and follow stories. They also use Getting Ready for the NYSELAT and Beyond in Preparation for the NYSELAT as supplementary test prep materials. Technology is used to support ELLs with programs such as Kids Spiration, Imagine Learning and Pixie. These programs are interactive. They have audio feedback and reinforce phonic and phonemic awareness instruction. All teachers have access to these programs to utilize with their students. In addition, we have a technology lab where SMART boards, laptops, and iPads are readily available for use in the classroom setting. Each classroom is also equipped with a Smart board to be used during all content areas to make the material more comprehensible, interactive and engaging. 2018-19 CEP 76  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program model for English language instruction, native language support is delivered to students through bilingual glossaries and classroom library books. Bilingual glossaries are available for math, social studies, and science. Students may also take the math and science tests in their native languages. MyOn reading and Reading A-Z also have independent reading books available to students in Spanish. In addition, school personnel, when available, are able to provide native language support to students during the school day. They provide clarification for ELLs in their native languages in the lunchroom , nurse's office, main office, etc. Teachers also group students of the same language for certain activities, so that they can assist each other and respond in their native languages. Language partners are also utilized throughout the school day. In the Dual Language and TBE classrooms, home language support is provided by the bilingual teacher in small groups or whole group as needed. Visuals, bilingual charts, bilingual classroom libraries, glossaries, bulletin boards, word walls, etc. support the home language. P.S. 506 uses Spanish F&P, Spanish Go Math/Investigations, Estrellita, formal and informal assessments to evaluate students in their home language throughout the year. Assessments are used to drive instruction and ensure students are acquiring the target language. For the TBE Mandarin program, teachers translate the assessments into Mandarin to evaluate progress throughout the year. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required support services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. ELLs are placed into age appropriate classrooms and utilize age appropriate materials. Small groups are conducted with students at the same grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 506 shares a building with P.S. 503. The auditorium, gym, schoolyard, cafeteria, and library are all shared spaces between the two schools. The auditorium is utilized primarily by our school, however, both schools have the ability book it using a shared calendar. The gym is divided in half and used by both schools at the same time. The cafeteria and schoolyard are utilized by each school equally during our respective lunch periods. The library is utilized by service providers from P.S. 506 mostly, and does not function as a library. Both schools have access to the shared spaces in order to ensure that all of the ELLs' needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met. We coordinate efforts to provide for equal access to all shared spaces by having a reservation system that both schools utilize. Both schools have access to reserving the shared spaces through Google. Despite not having a school library, all classrooms have a classroom library. Classroom libraries are leveled appropriately and include culturally motivating books as part of each classroom library. All instructional materials are age appropriate for ELLs. Literacy is instruction is presented through meaningful literature which actively engages students to participate and apply strategies learned. Students maintain book baggies with several books at their level that the ENL teacher has assisted them in selecting (beginners). Children at the Transitioning and Expanding levels of proficiency, who are able to manage their own book selection, are encouraged to do so. Despite sharing a building, we still have our own technology lab where SMART boards, laptops, and iPads are readily available for use in the classroom setting. Each classroom is also equipped with a Smart board to be used during all content areas to make the material more comprehensible, interactive and engaging. 2018-19 CEP 77  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Parent Coordinator and ENL Coordinator assist newly enrolled ELLs who enter the school. They answer all questions parents may have about the school, ELL programs, and the curriculum. Parents of newcomer students who were determined LEP by the NYSITELL are invited to attend parent orientations by the ENL department. Parent orientations are held on an ongoing basis to accommodate newcomer ELLs that enter the school throughout the school year. Parent orientations are held within 10 days of student enrollment to ensure that they understand all three program choices available for ELLs. Translators and translating devices are made available during the meeting to provide support in the parents’ native language. Brochures are provided with information on the educational program options in the language spoken by the parent. In addition, parents view a video which also explains the educational programs available: Transitional Bilingual, Dual Language Program and Freestanding English as a New Language Program. The video is viewed in the parents’ native language. Parents have an opportunity to ask questions about the programs available and select to have their child placed in one of the three program options. Parents complete a Parent Survey and Program Selection Form before they leave. The Center for Family Life (CFL), which is located inside of P.S. 506, provides after school services for students including ELLs as well as specific programs for parents, such as: ESL classes, home services (to help parents with family issues), family counseling and a GED program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. P.S. 506 utilizes the self contained dual language 50:50 model. About 14 students are ELLs and 11 are EPs. All core subject areas are taught in Spanish and English. Home Language Arts is taught in Spanish. Gym, art, dance, drama, and computers are taught in English. b. English and Spanish c. Each language is color coded, and on the teacher's program card subjects and languages are identified. d. Both languages are taught simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? -Professional development is achieved through the combined efforts of experienced content specific, and licensed personnel that includes: teacher teams, assistant principals, ENL teachers, Dual Language and TBE teachers, and the ENL Coordinator. The pertinent personnel will work with the staff (both teachers and non-pedagogic) to analyze and disaggregate data for all ELL’s. The teachers will utilize the information from the disaggregated data to plan small group instruction, group students by area of need and individualize instruction. Teachers share this information with the paraprofessionals that 2018-19 CEP 78  support their classrooms. - Teachers will meet on a weekly basis during common preps to plan curriculum units of study, gather and share resources and materials with the administrators, grade facilitators and/or ENL teachers. ENL teachers will work together and articulate with the general education teachers, on student goals and progress. -Instructional rounds and debriefing sessions will be conducted in order to provide the staff with examples of best practices. In addition, teachers will provide demonstration lessons and time will be afforded for teachers to discuss and plan next steps in student learning. -The ENL Coordinator will attend workshops provided by the Department of English Language Learners and The Brooklyn South Support Office, and turnkey information at grade meetings and/or weekly planning sessions to all staff members. -DL and TBE teachers attend DELLS workshops on bilingual instruction and turn-key the information to the ENL Coordinator and ELL Administrator. They then plan for next steps or implementation. They also turn-key the information to the whole staff when applicable. - Mentoring will be provided to new personnel at the school. - Common planning sessions are provided to all teachers of ELLs. - Professional development is provided to discuss and implement the Bilingual Common Core New and Home Language Arts Progressions into units of study for all staff members. -Professional development will continue on the following topics: UDL strategies for supporting various sub-groups, CCLS instructional shifts, text complexity, lexile levels; data analysis; identifying trends and planning next instructional steps, Bilingual Common Core New and Home Language Arts Progressions, supporting ELLs progress on the NYSESLAT, incorporating robotics projects into the curriculum, making the CCLS comprehensible for ELLs, creating language structures and forms for lessons, etc. - Inquiry Teams will continue to meet every week to revise and plan for the implementation of ELA tasks that are crafted around persuasive writing, narrative writing, and informational writing. During inquiry meetings teachers are expected to use protocols to look at student work and make modification to the curriculum based on the student work samples. Each team is comprised of an Inquiry Liaison that meets vertically and then turn-keys to their team. Non-pedagogic staff are invited/encouraged to attend all inquiry team meetings as well as staff and grade meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 506 provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Administrators keep a professional development binder in the main office that contains agendas for workshops offered to the staff in the school. Teachers have a tracking sheet to record attended workshops. Teachers are also encouraged to keep binders with agendas of attended workshops. P.S. 506 has a Professional Development Committee which meets with the principal and brainstorms ideas of workshops teachers would like to attend. A Professional Development Survey is also emailed to teachers to ensure all voices are heard. Administrators, with teacher feedback, plan out the year's professional development calendar ensuring every teacher receives their mandated ELL professional development hours in accordance with CR Part 154.2. ENL, TBE, and DL teachers are also required to provide at least 4 workshops to the staff with an ELL focus based on information they learned from attending Professional Development Workshops. 2018-19 CEP 79  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL Parental involvement is encouraged through participation in our PTA, classroom activities (publishing parties, cultural celebrations, etc.) and school events (open school week, parent teacher conferences, meet and greets, assemblies, etc.). In addition, monthly reports are disseminated to all parents with opportunities to outreach to the classroom teacher if they need further information. Additionally, the ENL teachers facilitate a few workshops for parents during parent engagement time. P.S. 506 provides individual meetings with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year during Parent Engagement time, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes the school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English and in the child’s home language in the case of students enrolled in a dual language program. These meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Either staff members assist with translation or telephone translation services are utilized. Teachers use tracking sheets to record attendance and all correspondences with parents. Teachers reach out to parents to schedule these annual individual meetings. ENL/Bilingual teachers schedule weekly appointments during Parent Engagement time with the parents/guardians of their ELL students. Classroom teachers are often present for these conferences. ENL/Bilingual teachers discuss what the results of the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT really mean and explain what their child's proficiency level entails. They also reflect with the parents on the progress of language development by analyzing past NYSESLAT or NYSITELL data as well as classroom assessments/observations. They make plans with the parents on how parents can support their children in their language development and prepare them for the NYSESLAT. They explain the goals of the program that their child is enrolled in, and the importance of keeping their child in the same program for several years to see progress. Bilingual teachers explain how students are progressing in all content areas both linguistically and content wise. ENL teachers in conjunction with the classroom teacher explain progress in all subjects and how they are fairing linguistically across the curriculum. Teachers review student work in all content areas, to help plan next steps with parents to ensure success of their child. Despite being mandated for one annual individual meeting a year, parents are encouraged to meet frequently. Both the ENL teacher and classroom teacher reach out to parents to schedule these meetings or have phone conferences. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Bi-Monthly meet and greets as well as parent workshops will focus on various topics around the Common Core Learning Standard, looking at student work, language and vocabulary development and how parents can provide rigorous, hands-on activities for students at home. At these workshops, parents will make and take activities that they can practice with their child at home. P.S. 506 also hosts monthly "Fun Friday" open-house days. Parents are invited to see how instruction is delivered within the school day and how we can strengthen the home-school connection with follow-up activities that they can do with their child. Each "Fun Friday" has a different from focus from Literacy to Math to Social Studies, etc. During Parent Engagement time, parents are invited into ENL, Dual Language, and TBE classrooms to participate in Lego Robotics workshops. Parents work with their students on building and coding Lego robots . They are also trained in how to work with the Lego robotics kits. Parents are also invited to come in during the robotics period of the school day to assist the teacher in the management of robotics lessons/projects. ENL, Dual Language, and TBE teachers also plan four additional workshops during Parent Engagement time. Teachers send surveys to parents requesting information on what they need support on, and then plan workshops accordingly. Workshops change annualy pending on the results of the survey. Past workshops include Understanding the NYSESLAT, Helping my Child Learn Comprehension Skills through Read Alouds, How to Use Estrellita in the Home, Navigating the MyOn Program, etc. Parents are informed of all activities going on in the school in their native language or preferred language of oral/written communication. School wide programs are advertised on the school's monthly calendar distributed to parents, as well as 2018-19 CEP 80  through telephone messages and flyers. Classroom activities are advertised by invitations sent home by the teacher. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 81 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dana Parentini, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 82  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 506 School DBN: 20K506 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dana Parentini Title Principal Ellie Vargas/Maria Grajales Assistant Principal Christy Wang Parent Coordinator Yulya Kravchik ENL/Bilingual Teacher Norma Mendez Parent Angela Hebert/Dual Language Tiffany Cottone/3rd Grade Teac Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Luz Cuervo School Counselor Karina Constantino Christine Etienne Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Anna Blaustein Other IEP Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 2018-19 CEP 83 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: P.S. 506 Superintendent: Costantino DBN: 20K506 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gongjun Yulya Peng Kravchik Parent Coordinator ELL Coordinator No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Assessment of our school's translation needs has been conducted through our PTA Executive Board, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, The Center for Family Life (CBO), and school staff. At the beginning of each school year, a survey (via the Blue Emergency cards) is sent to parents, where they indicate the language preference for notices sent from school. The Parent Coordinator contacts parents who do not return the survey. Outreach is provided in a language other than English when requested. The survey information is recorded, and all future school notices are sent to parents in their chosen languages. Teachers are also notified of the results in September, so that they can send information, when possible in the preferred language of parents. When flyers are distributed to parents, all languages go out at the same time in a timely manner. 2018-19 CEP 84  The Home Language Identification Survey is administered to parents at enrollment, which notes the parents' language communication preferences (both oral and written). This data is inputted into ATS and is also noted in the school. In September, we utilize the RPOB report in ATS to accurately identify the home language of parents, which is used in conjunction with the survey to identify parents' language communication preferences. Based on ATS data, the Home Language Identification Survey, the Blue Emergency cards, and our school survey, all data indicates that majority of parents at P.S. 506 need notices in Spanish and Chinese. Administration looks at these findings, and hires translators for Parent Teacher Conferences accordingly, as well as translating important communication notices, and publishing party invitations. Staff is notified of oral and written translation needs during faculty conferences. Paraprofessionals or the DOE translation hot line is utilized for lower incidence languages. The staff is notified at the September faculty conference that translation services must be requested several weeks in advance in order to ensure accommodation of all requests. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Urdu English Spanish Chinese Arabic Ukrainian/Russian Burmese 3 288 584 387 11 3 1 .23% 22.55% 45.73% 30.31% .86% .23% .08% 3 289 583 387 10 3 1 .23% 22.63% 45.65% 30.31% .78% .23% .08% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 85  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The Parent Handbook September Monthly Calendars Ongoing Saturday Program Information Ongoing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Bilingual Payroll secretary translate this document. For low incidence languages in the school, parents are encouraged to meet with the teacher and another staff member who speaks the language for translation of the document. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator also encourages parents to contact him with any questions they may have. He utilizes staff members for translation or the translation hot line when a parent needs a language that he does not speak. During parent meetings, the Bilingual Parent Coordinator always emphasizes that parents should come to him if they have any questions about any of the documents that are sent home. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Payroll secretary translate this document. For low incidence languages in the school, parents are encouraged to meet with the teacher and another staff member who speaks the language for translation of the document. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator also encourages parents to contact him with any questions they may have. He utilizes staff members for translation or the translation hot line. During parent meetings, the Bilingual Parent Coordinator always emphasizes that parents should come to him if they have any questions about any of the documents that are sent home. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Payroll secretary translate these documents. For low incidence languages in the school, parents are encouraged to meet with the teacher and another staff member who speaks the language for translation of the document. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator also encourages parents to contact him with any 2018-19 CEP 86  Letters from Administration regarding testing, policies, or news from the school Ongoing questions they may have. He utilizes staff members for translation or the translation hot line. During parent meetings, the Bilingual Parent Coordinator always emphasizes that parents should come to him if they have any questions about any of the documents that are sent home. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Payroll secretary translate these documents. For low incidence languages in the school, parents are encouraged to meet with the teacher and another staff member who speaks the language for translation of the document. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator also encourages parents to contact him with any questions they may have. He utilizes staff members for translation or the translation hot line. During parent meetings, the Bilingual Parent Coordinator always emphasizes that parents should come to him if they have any questions about any of the documents that are sent home. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Monthly Parent Meet and Greets Second Friday of the month interpretation service(s)? Paraprofessionals, out of classroom bilingual personnel, translation hot line. Our school has invested in a translation system which allows us to simultaneously present information in three languages, English, Spanish and Chinese. Additional headsets and transmitters will be purchased each year. School staff members also assist with on-site oral translations, as well as phone communication. The Dept. of Education translation service is also used by the school to assist with oral interpretation services. In addition, the 2018-19 CEP 87  Parent Teacher Conferences 4 times a year Parent Engagement Conferences Tuesdays Parent Workshops Ongoing school purchased School Messenger in order to inform parents of meetings and upcoming events at P.S. 506. The calls (information) will go out in English, as well as the dominant languages spoken by parents. Paraprofessionals, out of classroom bilingual personnel, translation hot line, Big Word translators Paraprofessionals, out of classroom bilingual personnel, translation hot line Paraprofessionals, out of classroom bilingual personnel, translation hot line 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, the school purchased School Messenger in order to inform parents of what is happening. The calls (information) will go out in English, as well as the dominant languages spoken by parents. The messages are recorded by the bilingual staff members at P.S. 506. For the lower incidence languages, paraprofessionals or the DOE translation hot line would be utilized. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Teachers are provided the necessary information in September of the goal of CR A-663 during Faculty Conferences. They are also provided with the phone number of translation services in order to accommodate parents speaking a language other than English. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 506, consistent with Chancellor's Regulations A-663, provides translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school. Each parent whose primary 2018-19 CEP 88  language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services is provided with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. In the main office, as well as the school's website, signs are posted in Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic indicating the availability of interpretation services. All parents at P.S. 506 who speak a language other than English speak a covered language. A welcome poster in the main office is also written in several languages. The school's building response team members are multilingual and will translate to parents in case of an emergency and make appropriate outreach. The parent coordinator provides information to parents regarding the Parents' Guide to Language Access, and Language ID Guide. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During monthly Parent Meet and Greets, surveys are distributed to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. P.S. 506 then reviews the feedback on the quality and availability of language services, and implements an appropriate solution. For example, the devices purchased for simultaneous translation was a direct result of parents expressing concern that they could not always hear the translation being provided in large group settings. More bilingual personnel present at parent meetings to answer questions was also a result of the feedback we received. 2018-19 CEP 89 
