2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K507 School Name: PERFORMING ARTS AND TECHNOLOGY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: FRANKLIN ENCARNACION 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Performing Arts and Technology High School 331900011507 9-12 School Number (DBN): 19K507 400 Pennsylvania Avenue Brooklyn NY 11207 718 922-0762 718 922-0953 Phone Number: Cristina Gambino Fax: Email Address: cgambino3@schools.nyc.gov Franklin Encarnacion Kameelah Dixon Andrea Carter Olga Sokolova Andrea Carter Malyka Bailey Shiann Green Ray Ortiz School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-455-4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingstone Street Brooklyn NY 11201 Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Franklin Encarnacion Kameelah Dixon Andrea Carter Enrique Scott Andrea Carter Malyka Bailey Shiann Green Loraine Ali Michelle Wallace Mary Best Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Senaida Maldonado Olga Sokolova Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school mission is that Performing Arts and Technology High School will provide students who are passionate about the performing arts (Dance, Vocal Music or Drama) or Technology with an opportunity to receive high level training in the arts within the context of a comprehensive, college preparatory high school education. We are committed to building strong partnerships with the professional performing arts community, institutions of higher learning and other community based organizations to provide our students with opportunities to participate in internships or college level study. We value a culture of collaboration and a focus on inquiry-based work that is 2018-19 CEP 9  rigorous and tied to the common core standards. We are dedicated to developing leadership capacity in all members of our school community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Although we are a traditional high school, we offer specialized courses in the field of Performing Arts. In our efforts to move towards implementing a CTE program, we are currently trying to build up the curriculum in these specialized areas to allow increased opportunities for career certification. We have created a sequencing track for Technology. Incoming 9th graders who selected to enroll in our Technology program will have an option of taking a Cisco sequence that would lead them towards certification after an examination. We are currently working to develop tracks in Choral Music, Instrumental Music and Theater. In addition, we will be developing the initial stages of the Dance CTE program during this school year. We serve a population of about 436 students. Of those students, 98 are students with disabilities (SWDs) and 85 are English language learners (ELLs). In order to support our students, we have incorporated additional tutoring programs designed to provide individualized academic support to struggling students. Time has been allocated during the school day, after school and during our Saturday Academy to support students. In addition to those programs, we have partnered with the Step Up Program and other outside programs that provide academic and social-emotional support for our students. We are also continuing to develop our Extended Success Initiative (ESI) program which provides academic and social emotional support to our African American and Latino male students. In order to prepare our students for college and career readiness, we have continued to develop our Advanced Placement program. We currently offer the following Advanced Placement Courses: Calculus, Literature, and Biology. Next year, our Advanced Placement program is expanding to include Language, Spanish, U.S. History, and Chemistry. We have also partnered with the AP Expansion program that provides support to AP students and teachers during Saturday Training Sessions throughout the year, and Syracuse University which allows our students to earn 12 credits, in house, by taking and successfully passing an approved AP Chemistry course. We have also built partnerships with the CUNY program “At Home In College” to support student exemption from college remedial courses and the Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation’s College STEPS program that provides additional college advisors who support our students through the college application process. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 98 SWDs and 85 ELLs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools that we made the most progress over this past year were creating a supportive school environment, building collaborative teacher teams, and nurturing the professional growth of teachers and staff. Our focus area for this school year is to ensure that our teachers provide rigorous instruction, that students are actively engaged in the learning process, and that we build stronger partnerships with families. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K507 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 450 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 24 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 27 15 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 87.3% % Reduced Lunch 13.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 29.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.23 18% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 58% 49% 49.5% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 70 64 9 85.4% 3.8% 19.6% 66.2% 2.0% 1.6% 2 36% 5.3 N/A N/A 68% 53% 81.1% 5% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. When analyzing NYS Regents passing rates for June 2018, it became evident that our focus areas should be Algebra I, Global and ELA. Over the past year we utilized Regents performance data as one of the indicators to assess student achievement. Analyses of Regents assessment data gathered from these exams, along with monthly periodic assessments data, were continuously used to inform curriculum development and instructional planning. The passing rate for NYS Algebra I Regents for June 2018 was 51%, an increase from 29.6% passing in June 2017. The passing rate for the ELA Regents in June 2018 was 50.3%, an increase from 48.9% from the last school year. The passing rate for the Global Regents in June 2018 was 42%, an increase from 23.3% in June 2017, but still a score that needs improvement. Thus, for the next school year, 2018-2019, there must be a focus to critically assess and modify curricula and instructional practice in Global Studies, Algebra I and ELA to improve performance on the NYS Regents Examinations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate in a professional learning community (PLC) with a focus on Data Driven Instruction and developing multiple types of assessments that meet the needs of all learners, which will result in a 6% increase of passing rates in Algebra I, ELA and Global NYS Regents examinations. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ELA, Global and Algebra I teams will collaboratively develop and modify subject specific curriculum that includes monthly periodic assessments which are designed to assess student learning and identify student weaknesses. Teachers will review item skills analysis of Regents data to modify curriculum and units. Teachers will use DDC (Data Driven Classroom) to measure student progress and reteach skills accordingly and record the data on results. A data team will be formed to analyze pertinent data, and one person from each of the departments will be a part of the team and turnkey information to his/her departments. As the year progresses, the data analysis cycle will be used to analyze data from these and other assessments to make strategic instructional adjustments to the curriculum in order to target specific areas of student weaknesses and provide individualized supports based on their needs. ELA, Global and Algebra I teachers will work collaboratively to infuse more access to informational texts, increase text complexity, add more text-based activities, and increase access to academic vocabulary. They will modify learning activities to build coherence, fluency, a deeper understanding of concepts, and increase opportunities for “real world” applications. In addition, they will incorporate more activities that push student to analyze, evaluate and defend their ideas. Teachers will utilize data analysis from the monthly periodic assessments to modify daily instruction in order to provide supports necessary to strengthen student thinking and ensure access to curriculum. ELA, Global and Algebra I teachers will be provided with professional development around curriculum alignment, developing periodic assessments, utilizing the data analysis cycle, making daily instructional adjustments that include rigorous engaging tasks and scaffolding supports for both struggling and advanced students. They will be provided with protocols and strategies for utilizing a continuous cycle of data analysis to target student weaknesses in planning, analyze monthly periodic assessments and modifying instructional supports to differentiate learning based on student needs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All ELA, Algebra I and Global Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Department Leads All ELA, Algebra I and Global Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Department Leads All ELA, Algebra I and Global Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and the Professional Development Team 2018-19 CEP 13 All ELA, Algebra I and Global Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and Department Leads ELA, Global and Algebra I teacher teams will engage in cycles of data analysis around student assessment data such as monthly periodic assessments and other in-class assessments to identify student strengths and weaknesses, and implement targeted strategies to support students. Teachers will analyze student work products in cycles to assess student comprehension, provide additional scaffolding for struggling students, provide extensions to challenge advanced students and re-assess learning to track student progress for groups of students and for individual students. Individual teachers will track specific, measurable data associated with their personalized instructional goals for the year. Teacher Teams will analyze assessments and student work at weekly department meetings, including the monthly periodic assessments and other in class assessments to push their own instructional practices and inform future planning for units and assessments. Administration will identify teachers who need additional supports in constructing, analyzing and utilizing assessment data from the periodic assessments (administered monthly) and provide the supports that they need to ensure that the assessment data is used to inform instructional practices. Teachers will work with special educators and ENL teachers to analyze data for subroups (ELLs and SWDs) and implement effective strategies so that all students achieve mastery. Teachers will differentiate instruction according to students' needs, and professional development will be provided to differentiate for subgroups. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator and administrators of the building will be key in engaging families to support their understanding of rigorous instruction. Two workshops will be offered every month, beginning in September, outlining expectations for students, shifts in instruction, and ways in which parents can support their child at home. Specific workshops for the beginning of the school year will include parents gaining knowledge on how to access students’ grades and monitor progress through PupilPath and Google Classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The Master Schedule will be adjusted to provide ELA, Algebra and Global teams with sufficient time to collaborate, problem solve, analyze periodic assessments and performance tasks, share best practices and make instructional adjustments. ● The Master Schedule will reflect double period global blocks daily for all 10th graders. ● The Master Schedule will reflect Global Review classes and Algebra Review classes for students who have not successfully scored a 65 or above on the NYS Global or Algebra I Regents. 2018-19 CEP 14  ● Resources will be used to provide weekly professional development workshops to Math, Science and Global teachers. ● Resources will be used to provide access to new professional development opportunities for ELA, Algebra and Global teachers at off-site locations or by outside vendors. ● Administration and the Professional Development Team will develop a comprehensive Professional Development Plan to support ELA, Algebra and Global teachers in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase of passing rates in Algebra I, ELA and Global NYS Regents examinations.  Administration will conduct formal and informal observations throughout the year to assess teacher effectiveness and to ensure that curriculum changes extend into classroom instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Monthly data analysis reports connected to monthly periodic assessments will be generated by teachers as they conduct their data analysis cycles. Lesson plans and curriculum documents   Advance Observation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In order for a student to be on track for graduating, they need to accrue 5 credits during the Fall semester and 5 credits during the Spring Semester, for a total of 10 credits by the end of the year. According to our 2017-2018 preliminary report card data on Student Transcripts Academic Reporting System (STARS), our credit accumulation rates for students in the 10th & 11th grade earning 5 or more credits was 69%, an increase from 55% the prior school year. Our school has established structures to foster teacher collaboration across content areas and grade teams to track and monitor student progress. We have also provided after school and Saturday Academy tutoring to help struggling students get back on track. These efforts have been made to increase credit accumulation and we have seen gains in both the 9th and 10th grade. We need to provide additional supports for our 11th grade students to ensure that they are provided with the necessary scaffolding for struggling students during instruction so that they can be successful in completing class activities, tasks and assessments. We also need to work on building skills in students that support perseverance, problem solving, time management, and teamwork. By targeting these areas, we will increase the credit accumulation for all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PATHS will utilize a research-based approach to support the “whole” student by creating a multi-faceted Student Intervention Team that will provide interventions and additional supports to reach credit accumulation targets in grades 9, 10, and 11. 2018-19 CEP 16 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All School Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Department Leads, teacher teams, CBOs Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will work collaboratively to modify curriculum to ensure that all students are provided with access to the curriculum. Teachers will incorporate more informational texts, increase text complexity, add more text-based activities, and increase access to academic vocabulary. In Math, teachers will modify learning activities to build coherence, fluency, a deeper understanding of concepts, and increase opportunities for “real world” applications. In addition, they will incorporate more activities that emphasize critical thinking and citing textual evidence to support ideas. Teachers will embed multiple entry points and extension activities into learning activities, and differentiate learning based on student needs. By providing individualized daily supports, teachers can target students who may not have done as well the previous marking period to provide early 2018-19 CEP 17 All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Department Leads, teacher teams, CBOs Administration, Department Leads, teacher teams, CBOs Parents and guardians of all students September 2018 – June 2019 interventions and increase the number of students passing classes and accruing credits at the end of the course. Teacher teams will engage in cycles of data inquiry around student assessment data to identify student strengths and weaknesses, and implement targeted strategies to support struggling students. Teachers will analyze student work products weekly to assess student comprehension, provide additional scaffolding for struggling students, and re-assess learning to track student progress for groups of students and for individual students. By continuously tracking student progress throughout the marking period, and focusing on specific areas that students need additional support; teachers can increase student performance which will lead to an increase in the number of students passing classes and accruing credits at the end of the course. We will increase communication with students about the relationship between attending school regularly, accumulating credits and graduating on time by increasing Town Hall meetings. Some of these meetings will be whole school, and others will be held to address a specific sub-group of students. The same things will be done to communicate with parents. In addition, we will increase ways to recognize students who are excelling academically, passing all classes, and students who have made great improvements in passing their classes through certificates, mailing letters home, Honor Roll bulletin boards, ceremonies, trips and other incentives. By celebrating student accomplishments each marking 2018-19 CEP 18  period, it will serve to empower students in our school community to try their hardest in their classes, and understand the healthy strategies that they can put in place to ensure that they are able to pass their classes and accrue credits in a time frame that will move them closer to graduation. In addition, communicating with parents will increase parent support in ensuring that students are moving toward accruing credits at the end of each course. Students will be provided with access to additional tutoring programs that will be available during the lunch, Afterschool and during Saturday Academy. These programs will provide students with individualized help to support learning, completing class activities and tasks and preparing for upcoming assessments to ensure that students are able to pass classes and accrue credits. Students who did not earn at least 5 credits during Semester 1 will be targeted for these additional supports to ensure that they increase their credit accumulation during Semester 2. In addition, through partnerships with community based organizations, students in each grade who are off track in credit accumulation will be part of a specialized program that will provide them with additional social-emotional and academic supports. Key school community members (administration, teachers, guidance counselors, testing coordinators, parent coordinator) will meet to form a Student Intervention Team. This team will strategically meet once a month to analyze credit accumulation patterns for each grade and reallocate resources and interventions early based on All School Staff September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Department Leads, teacher teams, CBOs All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, teachers, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, CBO 2018-19 CEP 19 student needs in order to ensure that students are moving towards accruing credits and the end of each course. There will be members from the following on the Student Intervention Team: each grade, each department, attendance team, school improvement team, attendance team, parent coordinator, guidance staff, CBO, administration. They will reach out to parents of students off track in credit accumulation to discuss and implement strategies to support increased student success. They will also strategize on how each individual team will collaborate and work towards the overarching goal of credit accumulation through their weekly and bi-weekly meetings. Our CBO, Cypress Hills, will be a member in the Student Intervention Team, and will work continuously through the year to review transcripts of 9, 10th and 11th grade students, conference with students about progress, and monitor credit accumulation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged in various ways to improve credit accumulation. The parent coordinator and guidance counselors will perform outreach to parents after each report card and progress report to all parents with regards to each student’s academic progress. Workshops will be held for parents to engage them in PupilPath and different modes of communicating with teachers to monitor student progress and promote student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administration, the parent coordinator, the testing coordinator, and school counselor are key personnel in the plan to improve credit accumulation. 2018-19 CEP 20  ● The Master Schedule will be adjusted to provide content area teams and grade teams with sufficient time to collaborate, problem solve, and share best practices around increasing students’ academic performance. ● Resources will be allocated to support mailings, Phone Master, Skedula/Pupilpath to support communication with families about students’ academic progress. ● Resources will be used to support student town hall meetings, student recognition ceremonies, awards, certificates, trips, and other incentives. ● Resources and per session will be allocated to after-school programs, additional tutoring and Saturday Academy to allow students to get individualized academic supports. ● Resources will be allocated to community based organizations that will provide additional social-emotional and academic supports to struggling students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, all 9th, 10th and 11th graders will reach a benchmark of accumulating a minimum of 5 credits, proving to be on track to reach their goal of 10 credits by the end of the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Transcripts Academic Reporting System (STARS), student report cards and transcripts Skedula School Gradebook    9th, 10th and 11th Grade Spreadsheets  Cohort data after semester 1-identifying students who earned 5 credits or more and are on track to meeting the 10 credit goal, and providing targeted intervention to those who did not. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students enter our school with different learning styles and varied math and reading skills. In order to improve student learning, the whole school must be involved in ensuring student success. Teachers must come together and create and implement instructional strategies to meet the needs of all learners. This needs to happen through analysis of various types of data and student work to meet students' needs so all students in our school excel. The team must engage in school improvement protocols, analyzing student work, creating common assessments, and revising curriculum. Strong teacher teams exist currently, but refinement and improvement is necessary for these teams in order to improve student outcomes. Teachers will engage in a PLC to support school-wide goals, emphasizing professional growth, accountability, critical thinking, checks for understanding and re-teaching strategies in order to provide daily supports for students across all grades and subjects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will create a school improvement team with a focus on teaching and learning in order to meet the needs of all learners identified as “at-risk” through analysis of school-wide benchmark data which will result in an increase of student outcomes as measured by BOY, Mid-Year, and EOY assessments. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The School Improvement Team will continue to consist of all administrators and a teacher from each of the following subject areas: Science, Math, ELA and Social Studies, as well as the attendance teacher, chair of the School Implementation Team, all guidance counselors, COSA, parent coordinator. The School Improvement Team will meet twice in September to create focus areas and decide on common assessments to be offered as a baseline, mid-line and end of year assessments. At each monthly meeting, members of the team will review data cycles and results and identify at-risk students. Teachers will continue to be given opportunities at the conclusion of each meeting to collaborate and share best practices with their department and the whole team, and plan interventions for at-risk students. Teachers will collaborate at weekly department meetings and during their daily Circular 6 Common Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and the Professional Development Team All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Department Leads, and teacher teams All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Department Leads, teacher teams 2018-19 CEP 23 Planning Time to further assess student work. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator, teachers and administrators of the building will be key in engaging families to support their understanding of collaborative teachers in order to support their children at home. Two parent workshops will be offered every month, beginning in September, outlining expectations for students, shifts in instruction, and ways in which parents can support their child at home. Specific workshops for the beginning of the school year will include parents gaining knowledge on how to access students’ grades and monitor progress through PupilPath and Google Classroom. Teachers will use their parent engagement time on Wednesdays to communicate high expectations to parents and new trends and shifts within instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Professional development will be structured to allow time for collaboration within and between departments to share best practices on assessment and to analyze student work. ● The Master Schedule will be adjusted to provide content area teams and grade teams with sufficient time to collaborate, problem solve, and share best practices around increasing students’ academic performance with regards to best practices presented at PDs. ● Resources will be allocated to Afterschool programs, additional tutoring and Saturday Academy to allow students to get individualized academic supports. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, school assessment data will reflect an increase in student achievement in the mid-year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Data analysis work sheets   Student services I-log Student work products 2018-19 CEP 24   Team Meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to ensure that we have the most effective teachers in every classroom, we have been working very hard to support the professional growth of our teachers. After looking at data from scholarship reports, report cards and school survey results we have determined that our teachers are very knowledgeable about the curriculum and the Common Core Standards, but there are some inconsistencies with regards to the level of rigor, questioning and discussion, assessment and engaging students in the learning process. Administration will take a lead role in facilitating teacher growth to ensure that instructional practices push students to take on a more active role in the classroom, thereby engaging them in the learning process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate in cycles of professional development and school-based intervisitations with a focus on best practices which will result in a 5% increase of effective and highly effective ratings in Danielson 3b, 3c, and 3d as measured by the Rating Distribution Report from the Advance system. 2018-19 CEP 26 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers, including those who received a rating of Developing on this component in Advance. September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team, Department Leads Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will be provided with professional development around topics related to assessing student learning, effective questioning and discussion techniques, including strategies for close reading of texts, how to scaffold questioning to push on students’ thinking, and how to establish student-driven, accountable talk discussions where students cite textual evidence to support their ideas and assessment of student learning. Teachers will be provided with professional development around topics related to engaging students through group activities, conducting station activities, designing task that push on student thinking, differentiating learning activities to foster student engagement, empowering students to take leadership roles in class activities and providing differentiated tasks based on learning styles and other modifications. This will be through the Common Core Library videos, outside presenters, modeling, sharing best practices, 2018-19 CEP 27  demonstrations, etc. All are aimed at the goal of using effective questioning techniques to push students to think and discuss at high levels and engage all students in rich learning activities. Teachers will reflect on their professional growth from this past year in relation to assessing student learning questioning and discussion techniques, assessment and student engagement from student data, student work products, feedback from walk-throughs, snapshots, intervisitations and informal observations. They will create professional and instructional goals for the school year focused on improving in the above areas in their classrooms.The questioning and discussion techniques, assessment and student engagement strategies modeled, shared, and discussed during professional development sessions will be a focus area assessed. Teachers will incorporate the Depth of Knowledge Chart to develop thought provoking questions when lesson planning. In addition, daily lesson plans and classroom learning activities will reflect higher order thinking questions and opportunities for content-driven class discussions, utilize the content specific accountable talk stems, and vary learning task and activities to both engage and challenge students. Teachers will collaborate in Teacher Teams to share best practices around building questioning and discussion techniques and student engagement strategies and creating common assessments for student learning. They will conduct “Learning Labs” within their classrooms to experiment with various strategies and conduct inter-visitations to support each other in developing a toolbox of effective pedagogical All Teachers Administration, Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 All Teachers All Teachers Administration, Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team, Teacher Teams 2018-19 CEP 28 practices in questioning and discussion techniques assessment and student engagement strategies. Questioning, discussion and student engagement will be a focus lens for instructional walkthroughs and teachers will be provided with specific feedback from Administration. In addition, Administration will identify individual teachers and departments that need additional supports in infusing higher order questioning techniques, fostering accountable talk practices and engaging students in the learning process and provide supports, including collaborative planning and targeted inter-visitations to build effective pedagogical practices related to questioning, discussion and engagement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator, teachers and administrators of the building will be key in engaging families to support their understanding of effective school leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home. Two parent workshops will be offered every month, beginning in September, outlining expectations for students, shifts in instruction, and ways in which parents can support their child at home. Specific workshops for the beginning of the school year will include parents gaining knowledge on how to access students’ grades and monitor progress through PupilPath and Google Classroom. Teachers will use their parent engagement time on Wednesdays to communicate high expectations to parents and new trends and shifts within instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The Master Schedule will be adjusted to provide content area teams and grade teams with sufficient time to collaborate, problem solve, and share best practices. ● Resources will be used to provide weekly professional development workshops to all teachers. ● Resources will be used to provide access to new professional development opportunities for teachers at off-site locations or by outside vendors. 2018-19 CEP 29  ● Administration and the Professional Development Team will develop a comprehensive Professional Development Plan to support teachers in engaging students in the classroom, assessing student learning, utilizing higher level questions and facilitating discussion amongst students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, we will conduct mid-year feedback conferences with teachers around the improvement of their instructional practices in using differentiated questioning, discussion, student engagement and assessment and will see a 2.5% increase in those areas  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.       feedback from walkthroughs and classroom visits student work products student data snapshots intervisitations Individual teacher Professional Growth Plans and instructional goal plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of the most important components that determine the academic success of students is the partnership between schools and families. Communication is key to ensuring that schools and parents are able to track student progress and intervene to address any obstacles that may arise. As a school, we communicate with parents through phone calls, letters, Phone Messenger, meetings and Skedula/PupilPath. Despite these efforts, we have had limited parental involvement. We track parent attendance at school events and meetings using parent sign in sheets. We have shown increases in number of parents attending the Title I meeting this year, with 16 parents showing up, an increase from 12 in 2017-2018 school year. . There is still much more that we need to do in order to build more collaborative relationship with families. We will continue to work on parent outreach by increasing opportunities to highlight student achievement and aligning our workshops and presentations with parent needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent attendance at school events, performances, meetings, conferences and workshops by 5 % in order to build a more collaborative relationship with parents. 2018-19 CEP 31 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Coordinator of School Activities, and Teacher Teams All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Coordinator of School Activities, and Teacher Teams Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based  instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will provide parents with a comprehensive calendar for the year that includes dates for all school events, marking period deadlines, report cards distribution, January/June Regents Exams, college trips, college presentations, performances and special parent events. We will give parents a questionnaire in the Fall to gather their feedback on what we can do to build a collaborative relationship with them, how best we can support their child, identify any supports needed for parents and families, and ensure that we provide them with effective strategies to support their child including the following:  professional development for administration and teachers related to working with and building 2018-19 CEP 32 All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Coordinator of School Activities, and Teacher Teams   effective parent partnerships training parents on how to work effectively with teachers to enhance student performance include health and nutrition services for parents and how to build supports for their children We will increase the number of parent events and workshops during the year in an effort to communicate and collaborate with families to promote student success. We will have Parent Town Hall meetings for all parents. Some topics to be covered will be about understanding report cards and transcripts, and navigating Skedula/PupilPath to track student academic progress weekly. We will also have meetings for specialized groups of parents, including the parents of Advanced Placement students, incoming 9 th grade students, etc. We will create a monthly parent newsletter to update parents about school happening for the month, messages from the PTA, and updates from content area teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, Coordinator of School Activities, and Teacher Teams If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The parent coordinator, teachers and administrators of the building will be key in engaging families to support their understanding of collaborative teachers in order to support their children at home. Two parent workshops will be offered every month, beginning in September, outlining expectations for students, shifts in instruction, and ways in which parents can support their child at home. Specific workshops for the beginning of the school year will include parents gaining knowledge on how to access students’ grades and monitor progress through PupilPath and Google Classroom. Teachers will use their parent engagement time on Wednesdays to communicate high expectations to parents and new trends and shifts within instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 33  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● The parent coordinator, school counselor and teachers are key personnel in the plan to increase parental involvement. ● The Master Schedule will be adjusted to provide content area teams and grade teams with sufficient time to collaborate, problem solve, and share best practices around parent outreach. ● Resources will be allocated to support mailings, Phone Master, Skedula/PupilPath to support communication with families about student progress and upcoming parent events. ● Resources will be used to support parent town hall meetings, parent events, parent publications, and student recognition ceremonies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, we will increase parent attendance at school events, performances, meetings, conferences and workshops by 2.5% in order to build a more collaborative relationship with parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent Attendance Sheets at school events such as workshops, PTA meetings and Parent/Teacher conferences  Parent survey responses  Record ticket data at performances Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutoring, small group or individually based upon the need Students are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays Tutoring, small group or individually based upon the need Students are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Recommendations for AIS services can be provided by content area teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, parents, and the students themselves as support is provided based on the individual needs of the student. In addition, student assessment data, attendance, and report card data is used to determine student progress. Recommendations for AIS services can be provided by content area teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, parents, and the students themselves as support is provided based on the individual needs of the student. In addition, student assessment data, attendance, and report card data is Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) PM (after school) school is offered to students needing extra help and regents review two times per-week and Saturday classes are available from 9am-1pm. “Lunch and Learn” Interested English teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment Incoming freshmen are grouped according to their 8 th grade NY State Math exam scores and are scheduled for a second math course. Math teachers use this second math course to diagnose and address student deficiencies. Students failing the algebra regents are assigned to a four term algebra curriculum. Teachers 2018-19 CEP 35  used to determine student progress. Science Recommendations for AIS services can be provided by content area teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, parents, and the students themselves as support is provided based on the individual needs of the student. In addition, student assessment data, attendance, and report card data is used to determine student progress. review the algebra regents’ results, use acuity and common assessments to identify students’ areas of weakness and target those areas throughout the semester. “Lunch and Learn” Interested Math teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment PM (after school) school is offered to students needing extra help and regents review two times per-week and Saturday classes are available from 9am-1pm. Students who did not meet the Regents’ requirements for science are scheduled for a review class that meets daily for 45 minutes. “Lunch and Learn”, Interested Science teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment. PM (after school) school is offered to students needing extra help and regents review, and lab make-ups two times per-week and Saturday classes are Tutoring, small group or individually based upon the need Students are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays 2018-19 CEP 36 Tutoring, small group or individually based upon the need Students are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays Tutoring, small group or individually based upon the need Students are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) available from 9am-1pm. Students who did not meet the regents’ requirements for U.S. History and or Global Studies are scheduled for a review class that meets daily for 45 minutes. “Lunch and Learn”, Interested History teachers offer and or are assigned to tutoring during their circular six assignment. PM (after school) school is offered to students needing extra help and regents review two times per-week and Saturday classes are available from 9am-1pm. Individual and small group counseling; parental outreach (telephone calls, letters mailed, home visits, parent meetings); collaborations with teachers and deans; psycho-social, behavioral and academic referrals as needed; school-wide assemblies and Town Hall meetings; student monitoring (conduct sheets, student contract); accurate class programming and Regents programming; case Recommendations for AIS services can be provided by content area teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, parents, and the students themselves as support is provided based on the individual needs of the student. In addition, student assessment data, attendance, and report card data is used to determine student progress. Recommendations for AIS services can be provided by content area teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, school psychologists, social worker, parents, and the students themselves as support is provided based on the individual needs of the student. In addition, student assessment data, attendance, and report card data is used to determine student progress. 2018-19 CEP 37  conferencing; participation in Pupil Personnel Teams 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 14 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services that we provide for students in temporary housing include ensuring that meals and transportation are provided. Students are also provided with school uniforms, school supplies, bags, books and other essential basics for school. In addition, students receive individual counseling, extra academic supports and and referrals to community agencies for additional supports. We also provide supports for families of our students in temporary housing. Family counseling is available and we make referrals for families to community agencies for additional supports based on their needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All of our teachers are currently teaching in their appropriate license area and are considered to be highly qualified. ● To meet future needs we will continue to utilize the services of the New Teacher Project and maintain a working relationship with the New York City Teaching Fellows and Teach for America programs. ● We will develop partnerships with local colleges and universities for placement of student teachers. ● We will attend New York City Department of Education and New Visions Network recruitment fairs. ● We will interview candidates as a team and require them to model a lesson prior to being hired. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our yearly PD plan is aligned to support teachers in understanding and implementing the 6 Common Core ELA and Mathematics Shifts and the 8 prioritized components of the Danielson Framework. In order to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified we conduct weekly professional development workshops that focus on the Danielson components that have been identified through observations as areas for growth, in addition to individually selected areas that teachers have identified on their Professional Growth Plan. There are also weekly department meetings and weekly team meetings that provide opportunities for teacher teams to eng age in cycles of inquiry about student work and instructional practices. Administration will conduct informal and formal observations and provide teachers with specific, actionable feedback, and resources to ensure that teachers are working diligently to become highly qualified. In addition, outside vendors offer professional development sessions to teachers and content leads. These training sessions are offered and delivered during professional development days, faculty meetings, and invitations for teachers to attend outside sessions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 CEP 41  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are integrally involved in the collaborative process around major decisions in the school. We have a distributive leadership approach with a grade team structure and a cabinet (instructional leadership team) along with content teams and teacher leads. Assessment has been a focus of our school and for the past two years, including what types of assessments to use, how to administer them, and how to analyze the data from the assessments to inform our instruction. Our PD is centered around assessment as well, and integrated with our focus around the common core standards and the Danielson Framework, specifically Domain 3d. Teachers in grade teams and department teams focus on developing scaffolded assessments and receive training through internal and external PD offered both by the school, the Brooklyn North Field Support Center and the Department of Education. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 42  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 332,968 0 0 0 0 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A,4a; 5B, 4a; 5C, 4a; 5D, 4a; 5E, 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 CEP 43   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Performing Arts and Technology High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Performing Arts and Technology High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing workshops for parents to assist them in understanding the State’s academic content standards, assessments, and how to monitor and improve the academic achievement of their children; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● provide parents with a comprehensive calendar for the year that includes dates for all school events, marking period deadlines, report cards distribution, January/June Regents Exams, college trips, college presentations, performances and special parent events. ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● utilize CBOs (BAM, HipHop4Life, Cypress Hills, Medgar Evers, Step Up) for parent workshops ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● create a monthly parent newsletter to update parents about school happening for the month,messages from the PTA, and updates from content area teachers. ● provide parents a questionnaire in the Fall to gather their feedback on what we can do to build a collaborative relationship with them, how best we can support their child, identify any supports needed for parents and families, and ensure that we provide them with effective strategies to support their child. ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● distribute a campus newsletter and creating a new campus advisory council; ● host parent town hall meetings, training sessions for Skedula and meetings for parents of incoming freshmen and their children. ● utilize mailings, Phone Master, Skedula/Pupilpath to support communication with families about student attendance and academics; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Activity  conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home   professional development for administration and teachers related to working   with and building effective parent partnerships training parents on how to work effectively with teachers to enhance student performance include health and nutrition services for parents and how to build supports for their children 2018-19 CEP 47  School Community Members Responsible Timeframe Administration, parent coordinator, PTA Twice a month Steps  Create a calendar for workshop dates.  Parent coordinator will perform outreach to parents for workshops (mailing, mass phone calls, newsletter).  Parent coordinator will work with administrators to gather all relevant information for workshop.  Presenters (guidance, administration, teachers, CBOs) will facilitate workshops. Accountability/Evaluations` Number of parents in attendance, feedback from the PTA/PA, student achievement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● having a campus welcome center, a campus newsletter and a new campus advisory council; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 48  Performing Arts and Technology High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. This compact was planned, and will be reviewed and evaluated in collaboration with parents at monthly PA/PTA meetings and SLT meetings through Q&A and discussion. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● distributing a campus newsletter and creating a new campus advisory council ● utilize mailings, Phone Master, Skedula/Pupilpath to support communication with families about student attendance and academics. ● providing workshops for parents to assist them in understanding the State’s academic content standards, assessments, and how to monitor and improve the academic achievement of their children; ● utilize CBOs (BAM, HipHop4Life, Cypress Hills, Medgar Evers, Step Up) for parent workshops ● provide parents with a comprehensive calendar for the year that includes dates for all school events, marking ● period deadlines, report cards distribution, January/June Regents Exams, college trips, college presentations, ● performances and special parent events. ● provide parents a questionnaire in the Fall to gather their feedback on what we can do to build a collaborative relationship with them, how best we can support their child, identify any supports needed for parents and families, and ensure that we provide them with effective strategies to support their child. create a monthly parent newsletter to update parents about school happening for the month, messages from the PTA, and updates from content area teachers. Providing a new welcome center ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 CEP 50  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● hosting parent town hall meetings, training sessions for Skedula and meetings for parents of incoming freshmen and their children; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Activity conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home School Community Members Responsible Timeframe Administration, parent coordinator, PTA Twice a month Steps  Create a calendar for workshop dates.  Parent coordinator will perform outreach to parents for workshops (mailing, mass phone calls, newsletter).  Parent coordinator will work with administrators to gather all relevant information for workshop.  Presenters (guidance, administration, teachers, CBOs) will facilitate workshops. Accountability/Evaluations` Number of parents in attendance, feedback from the PTA/PA, student achievement 2018-19 CEP 51  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 52  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 53  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Performing Arts & Technology This school is (check one): DBN: 19K507 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Saturday Program Saturday ProgramOur ELL community is small, but it continues to grow. Our community mainly consists of students of Latin American although we get a few from other places. The buck of our students comes after 9th grades and we need to encourage success and faster English Language acquisition to Pass ELA regents and be College ready before Graduation. We also added tutoring support just in case students are falling behind because of the language. Therefore, this program support all ELL students (69 students) from 9th grade to 12th grade where they are going to be group according to their ESL level with a certified ESL teacher. There will be 3 groups of 23 students. Each group of students will alternatively meet for 80 minutes with the ESL teacher. The groups will be separate by ESL Level. Group 1 will have the Entering & Emerging students, Group 2 will have the Transitioning students and the last group will have the Expanding and Commanding Students. They will also have ELA support by an ELA certified teacher that will differentiate the Instructions according to their grade level NYS common core standards. All instructions will be conducted in English. This program began on October 28th and will end on June 9, for a total of 23 Sessions. The sessions are held on Saturdays from 9:00am to 1:00pm. We also schedule 4 tentative days during winter break just in case of any snow day or students need more support. During each session each group will have 80 minutes of ESL, 80 minutes of ELA and 80 tutoring support. Digital technology will be utilized to support these students in language acquisition and conceptual understanding. To this effect, Castle Learning and Apex Learning, softwares that are already available in the school will be used. In addition to the above mentioned softwares, Achieve 3000 will also be purchased to provide students with additional opportunities to develop their literacy skills. The Saturday Academy will be supervised by the assistant principal, at no cost to Title III. The following materials will be purchased for usage in the Title III program: For The ESL & ELA part of the Program: We will purchase a English-Haitain Creole Word-to-Word Dictionaries Set and a Spanish-English Practical Word-to-Word Dictionary Set. Both of these sets will be used support the language acquisition skills of ELL students. These sets are also available on ShopDoe from the vendor Attanasio and Associates. The item number for the English-Haitian Dictionary set is 90193772X and the item number for the Spanish-English Dictionary set is 901828084. Achieve 3000 - 70 licenses The Saturday program keeps all records of students’ attendance and progress in a binder in the main office. This will expedite the process of informing parents of students' progress and to notify them of any changes. One method of communicating with parents is using the translation hotline 1-855-249-9103 o 1-800-231-0288 for those languages that we currently do not have staff available like Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese, Fulani, mandarin, Mandinka and Yoruba. We 2018-19 CEP 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information also use the translation services by the DOE to translate the information of the program In order to communicate with parents. Every week we send a phone message informing the parents of the benefits of the students attempting to this program. The Cost of this program include teacher per session hours, Material that we will purchase for the ESL, ELA and Tutoring program listed above. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We will support instructional practices geared towards the ELL population through focusing on second language acquisition support and strategies related to enhancing day to day instructional practice. Our Network will support our school by facilitating professional development. Our ELL services providers will also participate in workshops and trainings offered by the Office of English Language Learners. The Assistant Principal will observe ELL service providers and recommend professional development support based on her evaluation of the teachers instructional needs. The Reason our Professional Development are ongoing is because students changes and classroom chemistry change so educators must constantly try to keep up with the changes, trends and latest research on education. These are the schedule Professional Development. High Quality Instruction for ELLs and SWDs 10/19, 11/16, 12/14, 3/1, 4/19(No cost) 10/15/2018: Integrated Co-Teaching Models for ELLs and SWDs (Cost $500) 03/18/2019: Academic and Disciplinary Vocabulary: Supporting ELLs in the Classroom (Cost $500) We keep all records including agendas and attendance in a binder in the main office. This is the same binder that has the students’ records for the Saturday. This way we can see if the PD are helping student progress and how we can gear the PDs according to students' needs. I Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 CEP 56  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities We collaborate with parents to help ensure student success. We will provide parents with as much information about our ELL services, so that they can advocate for their families and their children's education. This outreach initiative will occur on a monthly basis and will be supported through collaboration with our Parent Coordinator, librarian, health clinic, a Spanish speaking teacher (who will serve as translator), the guidance counselors and support staff. Workshops for parents include: College 101---October 11, 2018 Open House---October 18, 2018 English Language Learners Workshop -- October 25, 2018 General Information for Parents---November 1, 2018 Overview of Graduation and Transcript Review---November 29, 2018 Fire Safety---December 10, 2018 Pupil Path Workshop---December 18,2018 January 31, 2019: Monitoring student progress. We keep all records including agendas and attendance in a binder in the main office. This is the same binder that has the students records for the Saturday. This way we can inform parents of student progress if they ask and we can also see parents needs base on the students need and progress. One method of communicating with parents is using the translation hotline 1-855-249-9103 o 1-800-231-0288 for those languages that we currently do not have staff available for laguanges like Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese, Fulani, mandarin, Mandinka and Yoruba. We also use the translation services by the DOE to translate the information, letters of flyers for parents. We send a phone message informing the parents of the parents activities and workshops dates and any changes. The parental engagement activities are at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 57  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 01 School Name Performing Arts and Technology H S School Number 507 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Franklin Encarnacion Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Thomas Riehl Teacher/Subject Area Covuris Then/Math Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Vargas/Social Studie Related-Service Provider Madeline Rodriguez Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Cristina Gambino Coach type here School Counselor Orquidea Luna Parent type here Parent Coordinator Sharon Thomas Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 59  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 494 Total number of ELLs 63 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2016-2017 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 27 15 0 0 11 12 Tot # 9 27 10 15 42 0 0 0 0 0 42 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess early literacy skills of ELL students, our school uses the Language placement exam. Students are immediately administered this exam when they enroll into our school, to determine their reading level. The placement exam is designed to determine where to begin instruction within the Language! program. The ENL teacher also works to individually test fluency and reading comprehension levels using Achieve 3000 in the classroom. This assessment yields a lexile level for each individual student, which informs future instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 60  The testing coordinator, ENL teacher, and Native Language Arts teachers collaborate to schedule initial testing and analysis of results, as well as testing throughout the school year. This analysis is then distributed to all teachers of the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of the ENL program, our school examines the instructional model and student data. Throughout the year, we examine student progress on exams, class grades, credits and attendance. We look for trends amongst varoius populations of students, including the lowest third, ELL's, and Special Education students. Additionally, teachers evaluate if students are placing out of ENL or graduating from high school. Teachers, administrators, grade level inquiry teams and the school wide Inquiry Team constantly review school programs and student progress to determine the success of our programs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The testing coordinator, bilingual teachers, ENL teacher and native language arts teachers collaborate at weekly meetings to address interventions and turnkey information to staff. Continuous on-site and off-site professional development is provided to teachers to keep up to date with new strategies, techniques and best practices to serve ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Applies to K-5. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data collected from the LAB-R and the NYSESLAT results, shows a consistent pattern of students testing orally proficient, though at a much lower level in reading and writing across all grades. However, the greatest number of ELLs are incoming 9th graders who are not proficient in English. So, we realize that this could be a key factor impacting the observed trend. Furthermore, results from Achieve 3000 assessments, Rosetta Stone, and in-class assessments are used to evaluate ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The testing coordinator, bilingual teachers, ENL teacher and native language arts teachers collaborate at weekly meetings to address interventions and turnkey information to staff. Continuous on-site and off-site professional development is provided to teachers to keep up to date with new strategies, techniques and best practices to serve ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PATHS implements a Small Group ELL instructional/Freestanding ENL program from grades 9-12. Students are categorized by proficiency level (entering,emerging, transitioning,expanding and commanding) and receive ENL services in Stand Alone ENL classroom and push in to Common Core subject areas. The primary goal of our ENL program is to promote full English proficiency in a supportive, judgment-free classroom environment. In addition, their literacy and academic language expands and provides students with skills that will allows them to perform at grade level in their subject areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP 61  In 9th grade, students receive 3 core classes in their native language (Spanish) and one native language arts class. In 10th grade, students receive 2 core classes in their native language (Spanish) and one native language arts class. In 11th grade, students receive one core class in their native language (Spanish) and one native language arts. In 12th grade, student transitions to core classes in English with ELL services where applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. This program is not offered at this school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? "Entering" students receive at least 540 minutes of ENL instruction time per week. "Emerging" students receive at least 360 mnutes of ENL instruction per week. "Transitioning" students receive at least 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. "Expanding" students receive at least 180 minute of ENL instruction per week and "Commanding" students are considered "former ELLs" and receive services for an additional 2 years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered in English to fully immerse students in this new language. Students use texts that are modified or supported with graphic organizers, visual, auditory aids and other learning tools in order to aid in comprehension. ENL students read the same texts as native speakers in order to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL students are supported by ENL teachers and general educators as well. Multiple modalities are implemented such as audio books, flashcards, tactile manipulatives and sentence starters, which are used to enhance instruction and prepare students for the rigor of the Common Core. Students receiving ENL services used the Vision ESL series, Rosetta Stone Interactive Software and National Geographic EDGE curriculum. These programs focus on phonemic awareness, morphology, reading comprehension, grammar, spelling and writing skills. In addition the SMART board and Macintosh computers are at the student's disposal within the classroom for translation and educational software. The ENL teacher also works collaboratively with subject teachers to accommodate individual students' instructional needs, learnings styles and classroom success. The Transitional Bilingual Program consists of core classes in students' native languages that follow a rigorous common-core aligned curriculum used schoolwide for each subject. The Native Language Arts class follows a rigorous, common core aligned ELA curriculum to prepare students for the NYS Regents and college-readiness. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher obtains translated assessments for ELLS, and Achieve3000 is used to assess students in their own language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are placed into ENL programs in accordance with the most recent LAB-R results or NYSESLAT results. In addition to ENL, students have access to support services that help transition into high school (Counseling or Academic Intervention Services (AIS)) b. Beginner ELLs (1-3 years) receive 540 minutes of ENL service per week. Beginner ELLs (1-3 years) are provided three 90 minute ENL classes per day. Beginner ELLs are taught in small self-contained classes, homogeneously grouped according to proficiency level. Instruction for Beginner ELLs is aligned with Common Core ELA Standards and the NYS ENL standards. Students are provided instruction in reading, speaking, writing and listening (four modalities) from the certified ENL 2018-19 CEP 62  teacher. To incorporate the Common Core State Standards for ELA content, the ENL teacher meets with ELA teachers in a Professional Learning Community and for common planning three days a week. c. Intermediate ELLs (4-6 years) receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students are placed in 90 minute classes that meet daily in a self-contained setting. Students are programmed for small group instruction and are placed in homogeneous mixtures based on proficiency level. Instruction for ELLs is aligned to Common Core ELA Standards and NYS ENL Standards. d. Long Term ELLs (6+ years) receive 180 minutes of ENL service per week. Students are programmed for one 45 minute class per day. Instruction is delivered in a small group from a certified ENL teacher. Student are placed in homogeneous groupings based on proficiency level. e. Studentds who have placed out of ENL as per their NYSESLAT are integrated into general education classes. Student have access to support from the ENL teacher for an additional two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students who are also identified as having special needs receive services from a special education teacher through collaboration and in push-in classes. Special educators work closely with the ENL teacher to ensure that the needs of ELL students with special needs continue to be met. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with IEPs are scheduled the same as every other mandated ENL student in an all-inclusive classroom. The ENL teacher works closely with the Special Education Department to ensure that ELLs with IEPs are able to achieve IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. PATHS provides a range of services for our ELL population. There is an extended learning program that provides Academic Intervention Services, with the additional assistance they may need in any of the content areas. This service is provided in English. In addition, we incorporate the Vision Common Core ESL Series to build fluency across all content areas. FDNY provides beginner ELLs with 1.5 hours a week of instruction in the EDGE program allowing ELLs to acquire knowledge in content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Depending on the needs assesment of the ELLs we have Curricula 21, a Pearson coach to engage in curricula and units modification and align assessment to fortify existing programming. Existing programming has been assessed and is working in order to address students' needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students receiving ENL services are afforded equal access to all student programs. Students receiving ENL are mandated to attend the Extended Learning Program after school and/or Saturdays. Students are also provided equal access to all elective courses. Additionally, students are encouraged to participate in school's extracurricular activities including sports teams and clubs. These programs include, but are not limited to: AIS, APEX, Online Music Courses, Career and Financial Management, Regents Prep Classes, Saturday School Clubs, Soccer, Football and Baseball. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 63  We use the SMART board in class and we have a fully-functioning new Chome Book Cart dedicated to ELLs so that each ELL has their own computer in class every day. We have Achieve3000, a computerized program proven to enhance reading skills in ELL students. We also use the Rosetta Stone series. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Parents are supplemented with informational packets regarding student progress and programs available to their children. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All mandated services meet the emotional, social, academic-grade and age-level needs of all ELL students. In addition, students engage in check-in sessions with guidance counselors to determine how students are assimilating to the school's culture. The school engages in ongoing outreach programs to keep parents abreast of how students are handling the new transition and also to get support in terms of how students are doing at home. The school has also created a shared space where students can go to engage in games and other social programs with their peers; shared space houses reading materials/literature in multiple languages and leveled texts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use the SMART board in class. The addiitonal materials we use in class are the Visions ESL Series : Literacy, Language, Literature, Content (Apr 20, 2005) by Jill Korey O'Sullivan and Christy M. Newman. We use the Introductory, Basic, Intermediate and Advanced portions of the series. We also use apple laptops and Rosetta Stone Interactive English Language software. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELL students have the opportunity to receive support during the school in Extended Learning situations (AIS). Students may attend AIS Tuesday through Thursday during lunch ("Lunch and Learn").l AIS instruction is delivered in small group and focuses on Regents preparation or any other academic needs of students in attendance on an individual basis. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered as an elective for all students at our high school. Spanish instruction is offered for levels 1-6. Instruction is provided by a native Spanish speaker who is bilingual in Spanish and English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable to our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL provider attends professional development offered by the NYCDOE as well as other outside organizations. In addition, on-site, school-based professional development is offered to teachers once a week (2:25p.m.-3:40p.m). Administrators, teachers, and support personnel deliver professional development on various instructional and social topics. PDs for ELL personnel also include posted PDs offered by the DOE, and the UFT. 2018-19 CEP 64  Ell students transitioning from middle to high school receive instruction in Small Stand Alone and Push-In classes. The small setting increases the instructional intensity offered to incoming ELL students. Additionally, PATHS is a small school with a supportive staff. ELL students receive on going support from the ENL provider outside of the regular class time as needed. Students (and parents) also have access to language support from bilingual personnel including a bilingual school aide (foreign language teacher). The school offers guidance counselors ongoing training in ensuring that ELLs are transitioning smoothly. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The pedagogue responsible for ENL services provides at the beginning of each semester PDs intended to inform staff of the needs and progress of ELL students. The ENL service provider is also a part of a Professional Learning Community (English Department), Language Acquistion Committee and Grade Level Inquiry Team. Records are maintained in a locked file and updated as required by DOE request. Record of PD attendance is kept in the personal files of any teacher or staff who attend PDs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? PTA meetings, ELL Parent Conferences (2 times per year), SPED parent meetings, Annual Reviews for SPED, Parent Messages and Personal Outreach; staff members proficient in student home language support parents with translation. Translation units are usually utlilized to provide written communication. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Upon entrance into the school system, ELL parents are given the HLIS. If students are eligible for ENL services, parents are informed of instructional models for ENL. Parents of students already receiving ENL instruction are contacted by the school to establish communication and describe what services will continue to be delivered. Twice a year, FDNY hosts a parent-teacher night. Parents are able to conference with teachers and administrators during this time. Invitations for conferences are available for parents in native languages. Bilingual staff members are available to trasnlate during parent-teacher conferences. Additionally, all parents are also invited to attend school PTA meetings. To provide full disclosure of student performance, PATHS uses PupilPath. Parents, teachers and students all have access to PupilPath. Teachers post attendance, grades, assignments, and anecdotal accounts that are available to parents and students; the school also provides training for all parents to effectively navigate the system. The Parent Coordinator has also set up PATHS email accounts for all students and parents. Bilingual staff members are available to translate and communicate information to parents. Throughout the school year, teachers maintain ongoing communication with parents to ensure that students' needs are met. Bilingual staff members are available for translations at both informal/formal parent-teacher meetings and encouraged to attend all schoolwide activities including workshops and engagement activities. ELL parents are also strongly encouraged to join the school leadership team and actively participate in school decision making. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A. 2018-19 CEP 65  2018-19 CEP 66 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Franklin Encarnacion, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 67  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Performing Arts and Technology School DBN: 19k507 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Franklin Encarnacion Title Principal Cristina Gambino Assistant Principal Sharon Thomas Parent Coordinator Thomas Riehl ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Then Covuris Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Vargas Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Madeline Rodriguez School Counselor Donald Conyers Tatyana Ulubabova Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 68  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Performing Arts & Technology H.S. Superintendent: L The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents come in to PATHS they are directed to fill out our New Student Packet. The blue student emergency card in addition to other documents identifies languages other than English that are spoken at home. The ATS Bio also includes information about the home languages spoken by the parent/guardian as well as home contact information. In addition, school staff, pedagogues who administer the Home Language Survey converse with students about family life in order to assess any changes in language needs. This information is shared throughout the school community so that documents sent home are translated appropriately. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 69 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Approximately 21% of our parents do not speak or read English. The majority of language spoken among parents is Spanish. Following that is Haitian, Chinese and Bengali. Because the ELL population at P.A.T.H.S. is relatively low, the Main Office, ESL teacher, Pedagogue conducting the Home Language Survey, and Guidance Counselor are able to alert the school community as to students whose parent or guardian speaks a language other than English at home and are in need of translation services. This information is updated on all school systems including Skedula and ATS. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We translate documents that we disseminate to our parents including Letters, agendas, flyers about school events and calendar items, monthly newsletters, parent surveys, parent/teacher conferences 2018-19 CEP 70  information, NYS testing information, and information about our after school and Saturday School programs. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings include PTA meetings, back to school night, Title 1 Meeting, Parent Teachers Conferences, AP night, parent workshops, and individual meetings set up by the Main Office, Deans, teacher teams, and individual teachers. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When a parent does not speak or read English, they are provided with a translated copy of Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their home language. We have posters in all the languages spoken by members of our school community (English, Spanish, Haitian Creole, Chinese, and Bengali posted in our Main Office. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator conducts parent surveys and we communicate with parents during PTA meetings, parent workshops and during Parent teacher conferences to gather feedback from parents about the quality of our communication with them. 2018-19 CEP 72 
