2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 15K519 School Name: COBBLE HILL SCHOOL OF AMERICAN STUDIES Principal: ANNAMARIA MULE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Cobble Hill School of American Studies 331500011519 9-12 347 Baltic Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 718.403.9544 School Number (DBN): 15K519 Phone Number: Fax: Anna Maria Mule amule@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Anna Maria Mule SvetlanaYusupova Lennel Thomas Beth Levin Alexis Owens Dejeaun Wright Najira Polanco District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Brooklyn NY JRoss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7183688515 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  FSC: FSC Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street BFitzgerald@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anna Maria Mule' Svetlana Yusupova/ Robert Mari *Principal or Designee Lennel Thomas Althea Judge Alexis Owens Dejeaun Wright Najira Polanco Shareen Forsythe *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KatarinaVemic Felicia Weeks Beth Levin Quiana Murphy Laura Cannistraci Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Coordinator Member/ teacher Member/ Parent Member/ teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the Cobble Hill School of American Studies, we have a strong commitment to shaping our students into competent, engaged, global citizens, who have a strong appreciation and understanding of the ideals this country was founded upon, and who possess the skills to become the change agents of the future. 2018-19 CEP 9  Our school mission anchors this vision – The Cobble Hill School of American Studies is a caring, learning community focused on developing, engaged, productive, global citizens. And so, we advocate: a commitment to student voice, a mutual respect for teaching and learning; and pride in work and achievement. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As a school serving approximately 550 -600 students, over 80 % of whom come to us with either significant learning and/or social emotional needs, we engage our entire school community (Parents, PTA, School Leadership Team, student council, CBO’s, faculty, network personnel, coaches, school safety and students, school curriculum teams) in leveraging our resources, talents, systems, and programs to improve student and community outcomes Thus, we strategically place many of our resources and attention to our 9 th and 10 th grade students since 9 th and 10 th grade metrics are strong predictors of success, while supporting students at all grade levels with the goal of success in college, career, and life. Students experience a personalized approach to learning as soon as they enter the 9 th grade at Cobble Hill School of American Studies. Beginning with our Summer Bridge Program (4 weeks over the summer before commencement of 9 th grade), our students get to know our staff, our school wide expectations, protocols for learning, and foundational skills in ELA and Math (through the use of Classroom Inc.). Our CBO, Wediko, whose office and classroom space is located on the 3 rd floor, presents and conducts parent workshops and student team building activities at our Freshman Orientations. Additionally, our 21 st Century Learning grant allows us to offer Restorative Circles (a goal setting advisory program with targeted students) as well as after-school clubs and AIS services for students. This has resulted in improved credit accumulation rates for our 9 th grade students and an increased amount of students promoted and on track at the end of 10 th grade. This is in line with the Chancellor’s vision to treat the 10 th grade as a priority year. In our school wide program, each cohort is assigned a guidance counselor that loops with that cohort until the students graduate. The guidance counselor becomes the child’s advocate and grade advisor. They collaborate with parents, teachers, deans, administrators, and CBO partners to ensure positive student outcomes and post-secondary success. In the past 3 years, our 4 year graduation rate has increased from 75% to 80% and our credit accumulation rates have increased by 10% in every cohort and for our lowest third. Guidance counselors take ownership of their cohorts and work diligently to help students from the day they enter the school to graduation and beyond. Our advisory program and our guidance and Wediko staff helps students build the soft and hard skills necessary for success and achievement while differentiating their approach for individuals and groups of students. This year we will focus on increasing the ability of our guidance counselors in creating initiatives and taking on leadership roles around various guidance areas (articulation, parent involvement, academics, college and career readiness, drug prevention, conflict resolution.) As an AVID school, we also believe that it is possible to close the achievement gap by preparing all students for college readiness and success in a global society. Consequently, we have put into place systems, structures, and routines to create and sustain a college going culture and a strong core instructional program that addresses the Next Generation shifts in ELA and Math at Cobble Hill. These include moving AVID school wide so that all students are supported by the AVID WICOR framework. This framework is driven by the WICOR method, writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization, and reading. AVID curriculum is used in AVID elective classes and in content-area classes in AVID schools. Across grades and in various subjects students are taught organizational strategies (AVID binder, learning logs, calendar etc); to engage in critical thinking (close reading, Socratic seminars, text analysis, research, debate, argumentative writing, experiment, simulations); and engage in peer tutorials (strategies for self-study and for establishing peer study groups) with the assistance of our Hunter College Tutors. All of our students take an AVID elective every semester. This year we will focus on building our students ‘ organizational and study skills. We will train our teachers in peer tutorials across content teachers and select students to work as coaches for peer tutorials. We also have budgeted for our school college counselor, who works closely with College Summit and the AVID coordinator to work with students on the entire college application process facilitated by a junior/ senior elective College Summit/AVID class leading to increased college persistence rates as evidenced by Progress Report metrics and 2018-19 CEP 10  “Where are they Now” reports. Our 11th and 12 th grade Peer Leaders are trained over the summer and work with the entire school community as student models for the entire student body. They conduct student and parent workshops, support peers in the college application process and serve as role models, organizing events such as the college fair and career day and advocating and spreading a college-going culture for 9 th and 10 th graders. Additionally, those students in our Pre-Law program take a four sequence of study, learning the skills and ideas necessary for post-secondary careers in law. Moreover, we encourage all eligible students to take College Now courses at City Tech or enroll in our AP courses. In 2017, over 60% of our graduating seniors enrolled in a 2 or 4 year college. We anticipate that our graduation rate in 2018 will be 86% with a low dropout rate. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our SWD's, approximately 20% of our student population are served in the least restrictive environment for their needs. Students are engaged in WICOR strategies and scaffolded supports in their content area classes as well as their elective classes. Core classes contain two teachers who collaborate to ensure the case management needs of students are met as per their IEP and that lessons and activities are modified as appropriate. Students who are ENLs are served according to their proficiency needs by two licensed ENL teachers. Students are provided with language supports as appropriate and provided with IPADS to support their daily translation and research skills. All teachers are trained in ESL methodology through QTEL and other high quality professional development including AVID strategies for ENL students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned )Next Generation Standards based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. I feel we have made huge strides in addressing this indicator. In most classes, this school year, teachers are utilizing varied strategies to address students learning styles and needs thus providing multiple entry points and a scaffolded approach. In regards to the framework, we have many significant improvement in the areas of rigorous instruction, creating a supportive environment, and building a collaborative culture. The key areas of focus for this year include strong family and community ties as well as establishing a supportive environment for all students. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K519 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 584 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 62 67 4 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 11 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 85.6% % Reduced Lunch 9.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 29.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 68% 74.1% 0.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YES YES No N/A 116 101 7 78.8% 4.6% 18.5% 62.3% 3.6% 3.3% 4 12% 7.1 N/A N/A 84% 71% 83.8% 15% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our DSTDE review in October 2013 “The principal, with staff support, facilitate the quality implementation of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in Pre K-12. Teachers ensure that unit and lesson plans that are appropriately aligned to the core coherent curriculum introduce complex materials that stimulate higher-order thinking and build deep conceptual understanding and knowledge around specific content. The school leader and teachers ensure that teacher collaboration within and across grades and subjects exists to enable students to have access to a robust curriculum that incorporates the arts, technology and other enrichment opportunities. The school leader and teachers develop a data-driven culture based on student needs, assessments and analysis, which leads to strategic action-planning that informs instruction and results in greater student achievement outcomes.” We utilize unit and lesson plans for mathematics and English language arts incorporate prompts from Engage NY materials. For the past two years , we are utilizing the entire Engage NY modules for all grades in ELA. Our data for this year shows that we our greatest needs are in the area of level 1 disciplinary infractions as well as in improving our attendance. Our attendance rate for the last school year was 80%. Our goal for the 2019 school year is 88%. This aligns with framework element Supportive Environment.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To improve student achievement through high expectations and rigorous tasks in Math, Science, Social Studies and ELA, so that by June 2019, there will be an increase in college and career readiness rates in Cohort U from 50% to 55%. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During our Professional Development Meetings we will incorporate Costas’ Levels of Questioning and Differentiated supports (scaffolds) to improve student achievement through high expectations and rigorous performance based tasks in Math, Science, Social Studies and ELA, In addition, we will incorporate the use of AVID critical reading strategies across all content areas as a method to increase success in reading comprehension and Common Core exam questions. Inquiry time will also be utilized to identify gaps in knowledge and skills and strategies will be devised to be shared and utilized throughout the school to address deficiencies. Our 11th grade ELA teacher will pilot a mastery based approach to grading in order to shift focus from student completion of tasks to student mastery of standards. Our 9th grade teaching team will implement mastery based learning and grading for the 2018-2019 school year. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ALL, especially ELLs, and students in the lowest third September 2018-August 2019 Principal, PD Committee, Lead Teacher, and Teachers Accelerated classes will be available in 9th and 10th grades to advanced students so they will be eligible for AP English Language and Composition and AP English ALL September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Teachers Literature and Composition, AP Biology and AP US History in their junior and senior years. All students will take the AVID elective class to support their academic learning and strengthen skills in writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization, and reading. Additionally, we will strengthen our assessment practices in these courses to better tailor instruction to student needs. Eligible students will participate in a Summer 2018 AP skills class to strengthen skills needed for success on social studies AP exams. Implementation of Project Lead the Way Biomedical Sequence of Electives. Offer 4th class in sequence for the course and add 2nd course to Engineering Sequence. Implement HS Science Research Classes in 10th grade for interested students and to promote STEM for Women. Science Research classes will be offered for college credit through our partnership with Syracuse University. 9, 10th, and 11th grade students who choose this course of study September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Teachers Use our Common Planning Time and Department Meetings to conduct Lesson Studies in order to Create Tasks (especially PBA’s) that permit or encourage students to make deeper connections between the texts they read and the real world ALL, especially ELLs, and students in September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Master Teacher, and Teachers 2018-19 CEP 14 once a month the lowest third (Relevancy). Use the AVID content curriculum strategies to increase the use of critical reading strategies and the use of process writing in our lesson plans in order to improve our students’ higher order thinking. Use AVID strategy-based lessons where students conduct the discussions in class, with questions generated themselves in their groups, will be an integrated part of our instructional culture. Use lesson study across all content areas to align all lesson plans, unit maps, and curricula with Common Core Standards by March 2016. Teachers of ELLs, SWDs, and AP will align the curriculum of their courses to match the ELA standards for general education students. Utilize ENvision Math curriculum from Pearson along with Engage NY modules to strengthen common core instruction in Mathematics. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Guidance counselors will be responsible for implementing monthly curriculum meetings to support parents in learning to utilize key Math and ELA curriculum (Engage NY Modules in ELA and Envision Math for 9th, 10th and 11th grade. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The expertise of educational consultants Flexibility in lead teacher programming AVID professional development and AVID elective class for all students Teacher participation in PBA study group Teacher participation in lab site inter-visitations with neighboring schools Staffing for Afterschool Programs Use of PD time for professional learning, inquiry, common planning and grade level meetings Use of common core aligned instructional resources and curriculum Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will engage in Progress monitoring throughout the year. We will conduct gap analysis activities with our PBA's to determine gains made in student work products. By February, 2019 we expect to see at least one level of improvement in key common core standards (using evidence in writing to support a thesis) as evidenced by progress monitory of gap analysis protocol on Regents based tasks with targeted students. We will also use our quarterlies data to assess progress towards students' mastery of key standards. We will use our quarterlies to drill down to individual students' areas of strengths and weaknesses as per key standards assessed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Gap analysis based on 9th, 10th , 11th, 12th grade next Generation standards utilizing performance based assessments generated by Envision Math Units of Study, New Visions PBA's and Engage Ny modules. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In conducting a needs assessment by interviewing staff and students, we determined that this area could be improved by adding a social emotional component, including character development and restorative circles within our AVID elective. According to the DSTDE Review held in the Fall of 2015, “The school cultivates the development of overarching systems and partnerships that support and sustain social and emotional developmental health. We also scored effective two years in a row on a school survey in the area of creating a supportive environment. The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is connected to learning experiences and results in building a safer and healthier environment for families, teachers and students. All school constituents are able to articulate how the school community is safe, conducive to learning and fosters a sense of ownership that leads to greater student outcomes. The school leader and student support staff work together to develop teachers’ ability to use data to respond to students’ social and emotional developmental health needs, so students can become academically and socially successful.” We have created a system where our guidance counselors loop with students over the course of their four years of high school and as a result get to know the students and their families very well. As a result they inform teachers of non-academic issues affecting students’ academic performance. We have also established clear, school-wide and consistent expectations for the behavior and safety of students ,such as the use of late logs, bathroom logs, hallway monitors, norms for classroom behavior encapsulated also by the use of the Ladder of Referral. As an AVID School (Advancement via Individual Determination), all of our students take an AVID elective every semester. In this elective students learn strategies for collaboration, organization, reading, writing and inquiry. It also serves an advisory, helping meet students’ emotional needs and exploring post-secondary opportunities. Guidance counselors meet together weekly to discuss student attendance, review outreach, and ensure effective communication and push into grade level meetings to discuss individual students’ academic, attendance, and socio-emotional needs. School leaders, guidance counselors, and the deans keep records regarding students with behavior issues, including anecdotal accounts, daily progress reports, and conduct sheets. Guidance counselors meet with a member of the school leadership team to review caseloads student-by-student. In bi-monthly meetings teachers refer concerns regarding a student’s conduct to guidance counselors, who respond by coordinating an action plan to address the student’s needs. Wediko, our Community Based CBO, targets students with a history of chronic absenteeism in middle school, providing counseling to students with behavioral issues and social and emotional needs; reaching out to families; and conducting home visits, if necessary. The protocols we have in place to nurture positive social and emotional behaviors fosters a safe, friendly environment conducive to learning. As stated in our 2014-2015 written feedback from Ms. Janice Ross, “the school offers a variety 2018-19 CEP 17  of school trips, such as a college trips, Broadway shows, and school team building trips outdoors, where students have the opportunity to foster their relationships with one another and the school staff.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, utilization of circles, guided discipline, mindfulness and AVID will lead to a 5% decrease in student referrals to the dean's office as well as a 10% decrease in student removals from classrooms for disruptive behavior or insubordination. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All 9 th , 10 th , 11 th , and 12 th grade students are scheduled for advisory 4-5 periods every week (via AVID elective). Advisories and activities will focus on identity building, study skills, goal setting, conflict resolution and career exploration. ALL Students September 2018-June 2019 AVID Coordinator/Law Program coordinator, Student Government Council, Guidance Counselors Students engage in character assemblies and socratic seminars based on the character trait of the month on a monthly basis. Restorative circles will be embedded in the AVID classes twice a month and the Deans office, guidance counselors, and administration will use circles in mediation and other student counseling activities. Ms. Leborious will pilot a mindfulness program by pushing into 5 -10 classrooms on a weekly basis to teach students how to engage in mindfulness. There will be one school wide mindfulness activity in the fall semester. We will work with our new superintendents' office to implement Ruler training to create a supportive environment for faculty and students. We will also implement Pedagogy of Love professional development so that teachers have an opportunity to asses students gaps and create a toolkit of interventions for them. Students will participate in team building activities and trips (October college trips, Advisory trip to Floyd Bennet Field, College Fair, Spring Career Day, Cultural Day, Peer Leader presentations, Peer Leader assemblies, team Building Trip in May to Camp Becket, AVID tutorials, Historical Trips. Grades 9-12 October 2018- May 2019 Principal and Administration 2018-19 CEP 19 Guidance counselors, College Advisor and Spark counselor conduct parent meetings once a month Students will be given the opportunity to attend after school and during school blended learning targeted credit intervention programs to help them pass regents, make up failed classes, and master content throughout the semester for their regularly scheduled classes via after-school tutoring. Teachers will utilize the academic intervention form for this purpose. Common planning teams, PPT teams and SIT teams will discuss the progress of these students. ELL coordinator and teacher provides targeted interventions, tutoring , advisory and parent activities (LAP, Title III, Title III Immigrant grant etc). Parents, Guardians, and All Students October 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principal of Guidance, and the All Guidance Counselors October 2018-June 2019 ELLs, at risk students, and students in the lowest third Principal, Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, and ELL Coordinator, Partnership with Children 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops as well as individual one-on-one meetings with parents will support parents and provide tools in academics, guidance and attendance for parents to utilize at home. we will hold 2 parent meetings a month on various topics and our guidance counselors and parent coordinator will be responsible for coordinating these activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Title I Priority/ Focus SWP and TL Fair Student Funding money will be used to support building activities and trips, and parent involvement as well as teacher/advisor planning time. 2. Blueprint for School Improvement funding will be used for expansion of College Summit and Avid across grade levels. 3. Title III will be used for targeted interventions for an After School Program: 1 teacher X 5 hrs per week X 21 weeks for a total of 105 hrs We will utilize our SAPIS worker and Parent Coordinator to ensure that students are meeting graduation requirements, outreach to students with attendance issues, and support students through action plans to help them stay on track. Also, in support of the Summer Bridge program that assists with AVID and the AVID framework for college readiness 4. Staffing Afterschool Programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP Title I TA 21st Century Grant X SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review to see what changes we will need to make to reach these targets. For example, to hit 85% credit accumulation for our 10th grade cohort we will need to move 15 10th graders. 1. 80% of our students in each cohort will earn 10 plus credits or more with 6 in core subject areas in order to be promoted 2. 60% of students in our lowest third will earn 10 credits or more with 6 in core subject areas in order to be promoted 3. Our school-wide attendance rate will increase from 83% to 85% 4. At-risk students will receive timely interventions including counseling supports, initial referrals, re-evaluations, mentoring, mediation, daily conduct sheets, tutoring, credit intervention (during the day and after-school) etc 5. 80% of our 9 th graders will participate in one or more extracurricular activities 6. 80% of our 9 th grade parents/ guardians will attend one meeting or more during the 2018-19 school year as indicated by parent sign in sheets. 100% of ENL students will engage in at least one intervention activity Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will utilize progress report data to assess this measure as well as the New Visions student sorter. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers use a variety of data sources including screening, interim measures and progress monitoring to inform lesson planning, develop explicit teacher plans and foster student participation in their own learning process . Lead teachers and consultants provide guidance to staff on instructional strategies to improve practice. We have made strides in this area by adopting the Engage NY Modules for ELA in 9 th , 10th, 11th and 12th grades. Teachers use transition cues to assist students moving from the “do now” to the mini lesson. In our 2014- 2015 Review, it explained that “distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. The principal has organized a professional development committee that has created school goals, the instructional focus and the PD plan for the building. This team meets September through June. In addition, there are afternoon planning twice a week for all staff by department, grade, and inquiry. Protocols are given to all teams and teachers are asked to submit their agenda and minutes to the principal when they are done. There are numerous partnerships to support curricula and teacher development.” We see a need to improve students outcomes for SWD’s (especially attendance, Regents passing results and graduation rate.) Sometimes we struggle with finding effective strategies to support students’ at risk behavior. Poor behavior, poor choices, and poor attendance prohibit many of our most at need students from succeeding. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to strengthen teacher pedagogy in ICT and self-contained classes to embed strategies that reflect our school’s belief about how students learn best and increase the level of questioning and student discussion so that work products reflect higher levels of processing skills and increased student engagement as evidenced by 80% of Social Studies faculty receiving effective on questioning and discussion techniques and Global History Regents scores have increased from 35% passing in June 2017 to 47% in Global Studies in June 2018 - a 12% percentage point increase. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Use the Backwards Design approach to create tasks that reflect the Common Core Learning Standards. We also want to accomplish this goal through the school wide use of our website to store unified lesson plans and instructional tools. All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal and Teachers Teachers will engage in varied and differentiated professional development opportunities in order to create curricula, including units, lesson and tasks that are challenging, differentiated and extend student thinking All teachers and especially ICT partners September 2018-June 2019 Principal and PD committee Through inquiry, teachers will identify gaps in student skills, as per the common core standards, and revise learning opportunities for students to learn and master necessary skills. Teachers will participate in students’ annual reviews and share student work to identify strength and weaknesses and add meaningful input into the IEP as well as monitor student’s IEP goals to report progress. Teachers will learn how to effectively use various co-teaching models as well as formative assessment to appropriately scaffold instruction for students. Outreach will be made to parents so that students identified to participate in our school wide credit intervention program, Regents preparatory classes, expanded learning time activities etc. will do so. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers, ISS teachers and their partners September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals and Master teacher Students at risk November2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals and School Counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The IEP coordinator will work with the guidance counselors to provide parents with strategies to support their children in literacy and mathematics. Progress monitoring will occur twice a semester and include a written report to parents. Parents will be invited on a learning walk in the fall and spring 2018-19. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Tax Levy, Priority Focus, Blueprint for School Improvement and Title III funding will support PM School, after-school tutoring, Spring Intensive, PD opportunities for teachers and curriculum in ELA and Math: 2. Teachers will meet twice a week in common planning sessions 3. Daily After School Tutoring: 7 Teachers X 2 hours per week X 21 Weeks for 294 hrs total 4. All teachers engaged in daily common planning 5. 1 AP X 110 Hrs for a total of 110 hrs1 School Aide X 55 days X 2 hrs per day for a total of 110 hrs 6. After School Credit Accumulation/make up credit: 2 Teachers X 4 hrs X 33 for a total of 264 hrs 7. Literacy Consultant and AP 15 days 8. Spring Intensive: 5 teachers X 6 hrs X 9n days for a total of 270 hours Professional development for teachers on Universal Design for Learning and close reading in support CCLS for 5 Teachers in the summer. Summer per session 5 days-6 hours including the materials/professional literature/readings for the session, as well as chart paper, copy paper and other supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2018 at the end of the first semester, we will determine who is on track to meet the goals below. 1. The percentage of SWD’s graduating with Regents Diplomas will increase by 10% 2. 85% of the time, ICT teachers will plan for and provide differentiated supports for individual students, based on formative and summative assessment data, and lesson plans as evidenced by Advance observation data 3. 75% of students will show growth in select reading, writing and mathematics standards as tracked by gap analysis conducted for PBA assesssments for the fall 4. Academic Intervention forms will show evidence of students strength and weaknesses and interventions to be put in place to help students achieve mastery. 5. 50% of SWD’s in 2019 cohort will graduate with a Regents rather than a local diploma 6. All IEP meetings will take place in a timely fashion and include a review and analysis of student work to better inform students accommodations and placement as evidenced by SESIS (status of annual reviews) 2018-19 CEP 24  85% of students in PM school and other extended learning opportunities will earn 10 credits or more at the end of the 2015 school year Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review Scholarship reports and Progress to graduation trackers as well as data gleaned from the student sorter. By February 2019, 80% of students with disabilities will be on track to graduate with a Regents or local diploma. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Learning Environment Survey data shows that this area has improved quite a bit since 2015-16 Teachers have been given quite a bit of autonomy and work in teams across the school and on a variety of inquiry projects. As stated in our 2014-2015 Principal Performance Observation Feedback, “the principal accomplishes culture building through several successful systems and structures, such as a monthly principal newsletter to reinforce the school’s instructional focus, promote upcoming events and advertise school celebrations, and this maintains a positive learning environment.” Leaders ensure an articulated vision, understood and shared across the community, with a shared sense of urgency about achieving school-wide goals aligned with the vision as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems to examine and improve individual and school-wide practices in the critical areas (student achievement, curriculum & teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health) that make progress toward mission-critical goals. Leaders make strategic decisions to organize resources concerning human, programmatic and fiscal capital so that school improvement and student goals are achieved. The school leader has a fully functional system in place to conduct targeted and frequent observations; track progress of teacher practices based on student data, feedback and professional development opportunities; and hold administrators and staff accountable for continuous improvement. We allocate resources to promote and support the academic achievement of students. We identify strong student teachers in the school who become potential candidates for full-time teaching positions. We have advanced placement courses for high performing students and programmed academic intervention services (AIS) and a credit recovery program for low performing students. We have an afterschool academic program, Saturday School, and a Spring Intensive program for students. Our after-school programs help prepare students for the college admission process and provide credit recovery to enable students to stay on track to graduate. We also provide support services for English language learners during the afterschool program to keep students on the path toward college readiness and we have two English as second language (ESL) teachers to work with small groups of students in the program. We have been consistently proactive in devoting resources to areas of need, allowing the school to support student achievement. Multiple structures are in place to address the academic and social needs of students to achieve school-wide goals on an ongoing basis. We increase teacher capacity to ensure improved instructional strategies and delivery through job-embedded professional development provided by educational consultants who work with teachers on lesson plan development, instructional best practices, and implementation of the Common Core Instructional shifts. Gap and item analysis data from student assessments are used at data meetings to inform teacher improvement strategies and monitor the areas targeted for improvement with the educational consultants providing teacher assistance. In cyclical inquiry teams, teachers assess the quality of students’ work through reviews of homework assignments, organization of course content notes, student understanding of specific course content, and quiz grades during advisory periods, and teachers inform counselors of the results to ensure prompt intervention supports are provided to identified students. Common planning meetings and grade level meetings focus on student work and provide support across grade levels. School leaders conduct formal and informal observations and walkthroughs of classrooms to assess instructional practices, and we provide timely feedback, electronically and through informal conversations. Teachers also engage in instructional rounds, Labsite Intervisitations, and conduct their own labsite on questioning and discussion strategies 2018-19 CEP 26  for our network schools. We also wish to expand AVID tutorials across the school and will be serving as an AVID showcase school in 2018-19. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Before June 2019, strengthen the processes for classroom observations to ensure coherent effective feedback to teachers in order to improve instructional practices and student outcomes by strengthening teacher abilities to provide rigorous tasks via vertical and horizontal planning as evidenced by 90 percent of teachers receiving a score ofeffective or highly effective in lesson planning and preparation by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Participate in teacher workshops Create opportunities for in order to refine and share best instructional strategies, especially in the area of student talk and building student study skills Principal, assistant principal, lead teachers, teachers, coaches will utilize Advance to identify schoolwide trends and leverage professional development and coaching to assist teachers in making growth in areas of weakness. Provide feedback in a timely fashion either in writing or verbally after every observation. Consultants and APs will provide support to teachers on a weekly basis by department based on recommendations and teacher created goals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Untenured or new teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal All teachers Fall Spring 2018-2019 Principal and teachers All teachers August All teachers 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administrators, PD committee, lead teacher Principal and Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host 2 community school forums - one in the fall as well as in the spring. We will also conduct a number of AVID workshops for parents throughout the year so that they can support students in building the AVID habits of learning both at school and at home. We will also host a welcoming schools initiative so that parents will form a committee that will lead a number of assessments and action plans to make our school a more welcoming environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Title 1 SWP as well as Title I Priority/Focus SWP funds will be used to pay for Educational consultants to provide professional development and training focusing on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Domain 3. Frank Cunningham Associates will provide the professional development sessions 15 teachers X 57 Days 2-3 hours per teacher/groups of teachers during each visit. 2018-19 CEP 28  2. Blueprint for School Improvement focus money will be used to support salary for Lead Teachers who will conduct lesson studies, inquiry cycles, and coaching/intervisitations 3. Professional development on the integration/implementation of Castle Learning software programs into curricula and daily lesson planning to assess student learning and gather data on student progress in support of Domain 3. All classroom teachers will receive professional development as well as in class coaching at different times based on their need 15 teachers/group of teachers X 57 Days 2-3 hours. Skedula will be one of the softwares used to capture student data and monitor student progress. School leader and teachers will use student data to gauge the impact of instructional practices on student performance and progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. All teachers will receive a minimum of 4 observations with feedback throughout the year, by June 2019 2. All teachers who received an ineffective /developing rating in the 2017-2018 school year, have collaborated to establish teacher improvement plans and are receiving coaching 3. Various teachers have been selected to attend labsite professional development to support areas of weakness. Labsites are aligned to the Danielson Framework 4. All teachers who choose Observation Cycle 1 will complete a pre-observation form prior to the pre-observation conference and reflect on planning practices during the post-observation conference 5. Leadership meetings are held on a weekly basis with APs, consultants and lead teachers to debrief instructional trends and plan activities to foster growth. Feedback (written or verbal) is provided to all teachers within one week of observation. 6. Lead teachers assigned to coach select teachers keep notes and provide feedback, coaching and modeling. Administrators monitor the work of the lead teachers and the educational consultants through conversations, weekly leadership meetings and checking logs All teachers will participate in initial, mid-year, and end-of- year conversations during the 2018-19 school year, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data will show, that by February 2019 all teachers will have received at least 2 observations with feedback related to planning and preparation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school atmosphere is welcoming and fosters a feeling of belonging and trust, which encourages families to freely and frequently engage with the school, leading to increased student success. The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that students’ strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. The entire school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide professional development across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. The entire school shares data in a way that empowers and encourages families to use and understand data to promote dialogue between parents, students and school constituents centered on student learning and success. We share data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success, encourages, and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. We disseminate the following to parents: progress reports sent out twice per marking period, parent newsletters, and parent meeting agendas. The staff also conducts parent workshops, including sessions on understanding student data and sessions on the requirements students need to graduate. Our school website translated into a variety of languages also makes data accessible to parents. We utilize Skedula to share information on attendance, grades, and student participation. We communicate information to parents about students being on track to graduate high school college- and career-ready during parent workshops, breakfasts, and evening and weekend events. Additionally, we utilize the NYCDOE’s “Expect Success” packets, which are available in 11 different languages and providing online data accessible to parents in 26 languages. Multiple events and varied communication modalities empower families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Wediko, our CBO will conduct outreach to parents in the form of home visits and workshops. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To improve overall school tone and student resiliency by building capacity among all faculty members to create trust and meaningful relationships so that by June 2019, student related incidents, particularly levels 4 and 5 show a 5% decrease. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Enhance opportunities for parents to learn more about college and career readiness (college trips, Financial Aid Night, College Fair, Career Day along with College Trips 10-12 th grade parents Utilize school website to make daily announcements, post important resources, and school calendar. Website translates information in over 30 languages All stakeholders Conduct Freshmen Orientation and Summer Bridge program Implement Datacation school wide so that parents can have timely access to students’ assignments, grades, attendance and direct email with teachers 9 th grade parents All parents Throughout the year August 2018– August 2019 Summer 2018 Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal and College Counselor Assistant principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Wediko Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I Priority Focus will be used to provide parent engagement activities. This will take place with the use of an outside CBO/Partnership With Children. Title I Priority Focus will be used to provide funds to support positive behavior and student attendance though a variety of activities/educational visits/trips. Title I Priority/Focus will be used to purchase Skedula. Skedula’s linked systems will empower our administration, teachers, parents, and students by making it easy to view, analyze, and/or cross-reference data. It will help our school to actively assess new needs, address performance gaps, increase transparency, and promote academic success. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 31  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Increased Parental Involvement in School Activities and School Decision Making by 20% 2. All parents will receive resources at least twice a semester 3. Student Government will present at PTA meetings and conduct activities and events to involve families at least 3 times a year 4. 80% of 11 and 12 th grade parents will participate in at least one college activity in the 2014-15 school year 5. 50% of parents/guardians will attend at least one event during the school year 40% of incoming Freshmen will participate in the Bridge program Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from parent meetings and activities will show an increase in parental participation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring less than a 3 on 8 th grade ELA test Students scoring less than a 3 on 8 th grade Math test Science 9 th grade students Social Studies Students who have failed Global or US History Regents At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with chronically poor attendance from middle schools and students at risk Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Wilson, Classroom Inc, , ELA Modules, ESL classes and LAB 10th grade Algebra classes in addition to geometry, Meaningful Math, Engage NY Modules, Envision Math Program AVID close reading strategies, literacy strategies and organizational strategies, Enrichment classes, Regents prep classes, Castle Learning, and Project Lead the Way Social Studies tutoring on Saturday and after school – Castle Learning, Regents Prep.org Classroom presentations, group counseling and one to one counseling. At Risk group counseling and individual counseling as preventative measures prior to initial referrals.SAPIS Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group,tutoring, 9 th grade elective During and after school Small group tutoring, during math blocks During day and after school AVID elective classes and Project Lead the Way During the day and afterschool Small group tutoring Afterschool and Saturdays Small group, one-to one During and after school 2018-19 CEP 33  counselor handles substance abuse prevention via group counseling and individual counseling. We also offer condom availability program. Mental health referrals to Good Shepherd Services and St. Christopher Ottille: Center For Family Life. Holistic Adolescent Referrals to the Door One-on-one and small group counseling – Partnership with Children 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 54 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. counseling, afterschool programs, clothing, supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will attend hiring fairs, select and train new teachers, provide mentors for new teachers, support the work of lead teachers. Action Plan Interview, observe and coach student teachers from Hunter College assigned to Cobble Teachers attend mentor training so that they can serve as Mentors to new teachers Lead teachers also provide mentoring and support to new teachers New teachers are made aware of opportunities to gain additional college credits towards gaining additional certifications (especially hard- to –staff subject areas – ESL and Special Education 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development plan includes: Labsite Intervisitations and Study groups aligned to Danielson Rubric AVID Critical Reading, Implementation and Tutorial Professional Development Weekly Coaching by Educational Consultants Monday and Tuesday professional learning (lesson study, intervisitations, etc) OSYD training on Bullying – From Bystander to Allies 2018-19 CEP 37  QTEL training Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 38  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 489,324.00 0 11,200.00 0 3,355,548.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 2018-19 CEP 39   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Cobble Hill School of American Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [The Cobble Hill School of American Studies will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 41  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 42  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Cobble Hill School of American Studies , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 CEP 44  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated through our AVID classes and woven throughout the teams at our school to lead to improved academic outcomes. These teams include the Attendance team, the PPt team, the AVID team and the Cabinet as well as the SLT. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our attendance rate to 85%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Our academic goals will be supported by expanded learning time, home visits, group counseling, individual counseling leading to an increase in student resiliency. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Wediko Wediko Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal at risk students, Attendence between 50-80% All students counseling, push in sessions and groups Our attendance rate will increase to 85% counseling, push-in workshops 300 students will achieve 30 hours or more of expanded learning time Leadership Program all students afterschool clubs 80 students will achieve 30 plus hours of enrichment Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 47 $ 45,000 will be provided to the school for Saturday school academic courses and enrichment Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century PTA Funded X SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. We will partner with our community school to work to improve our attendance and provide enrichment and services to our at risk students. We will meet weekly to conduct a needs assessment and create action plans for the month. Students will receive individual counseling and group counseling throughout the year and engage in restorative circles weekly in their AVID classes facilitated by the CBO. All students will receive vision screening and the CBO will assist in helping us with renegaging LTA's through home visits. 2. 3. 4. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 CEP 48  Wediko, Leadership Program and schools. Meetings will be organized by the grant manager several times a year to assess progress over time. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. We hired a community school director to supervise Wediko counselors and work as a liasion to support school initiatives with community schools resources. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018-June 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 30 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PART B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The Cobble Hill School of American Studies (K519) currently serves 54 English Language Learners (ELLs) through a combination of freestanding ESL, after school Academic Writing/Skills Class, Saturday School Creative Writing/Informational Writing Enrichment classes, and extracurricular arts/civics enrichment events. Our Title III Instructional program will address three goals: 1. Academic Writing/Skills class to support our ELLs in gaining common core literacy skills in their content area classes resulting in increased credit accumulation 2. Enrichment Literacy Class for ELLs (Creative Writing/Informational Writing) targeted for students that need to pass the English Regents this year for graduation 3. Interdisciplinary Arts and Civics Skills Enrichment that involve both students and their families. To address our first goal, we have chosen to make the after school Academic Writing/Skills class available to our students to assist them in gaining the skills necessary to interact with content rich/text heavy classwork. The This time will be used to find alternate resources and texts that provide multiple points of entry, as well as direct instruction to make content comprehensible. This program will be available to all students (SIFE, Newcomers, Long-term ELLs, Grades 9-12) and required for any student who has received a 75 or below on their report card for that marking period. Students will be identified based on report card grades and teacher recommendation via school based quarterly academic intervention forms and will receive Title III letters. language of Instruction for this class is in English. Our data analyst, AP Constantinidis works with the guidance staff as well as the ESL coordinator to identify students for this class after a review of Regents data and PBA's gap analysis results (at the end of each marking period and at the end of every semester) to identify trends in academic outcomes for students. Attendance sheets as well as student progress reports will be generated for this class and program notification will for parents will be based on the home language. Materials include teacher generated resources and units of study as well as integrated units from Teaching Matters' Writing Matters program. This class will pay per session for participating teachers through Title III funds. It will be available Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning September 26, 2017 from 2:45-4:15 pm. It will continue twice a week throughout the spring semester and conclude on June 9, 2018 for a total of 66 sessions x 51.50 x2 = $8000. After school support will be staffed by our ESL teacher/ELL Coordinator Ms. Lifschutz, as well as by any content area teachers who are asked to participate based on student need. Primary materials used will be through our ESL Resource Library, which includes modified texts and books on content area topics. Title III funds will be used to purchase additional materials including native language books for this resource center (Cambridge University Press, National Geographic). This after school Academic Writing/Skills course will also address vocabulary development through an online platform (Membean). 2018-19 CEP 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information In November 2017, we will begin our Saturday Academy Literacy Program. Our rationale is that language acquisition and instruction in literacy go hand in hand. Students will be taught to and engage in various common core skills and competencies, including lifting evidence from text to support their ideas, identifying author's voice and engaging in literacy analysis as well as academic vocabulary building. This language and literacy development program for ELLs and Immigrant students will be co-taught by our certified ESL teacher (grade 9) and another ESL-certified instructor (grade 10) . Title III funds will be used toward per session for these after school and Saturday sessions. Both teachers will provide instruction for small groups and divide the students by grade level (9th and 10th grade). Beginning on December 5, the students in this category ( targeted from grades 11 and 12) will meet from 10:00 AM until 2:00 PM with a ESL-certified instructor. Sessions will continue to take place on December 12 and 20, 2016 and January 2, 17, 2017, totaling 20 hours of instruction. There will be a total of ten hour-long sessions that will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:45-4:15 between December 5, 2016 and concluding January 17, 2017, totaling 15 hours of instruction. Materials will include past Regents exams, Membean vocabulary software, and teacher-generated materials. This same sequence of after school/Saturday direct instruction will take place in the spring to prepare the 54 ELLs (grades 9 and 10) to gain the acquisition of important common core skills, such as analysis, using annotation to mark text, vocabulary building, use of graphic organizers, across genres (especially the reading of informational text) will support skills necessary for student success on various Regents exams and or NYSELSAT exams. It will also serve as enrichment since students will learn about various current event topics and issues in depth. Instructors will remain the same, both being ESL-certified. Instruction will take place from 2:45-4:00 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from May 1 to June 9, 2018 (15 hours) and Saturday Academy sessions from 10:00 AM to 2:00 PM on May 6, 13, 20, and 27 and June 3 and 10, 2018 (24 hours). Materials will include modified texts, native language textbooks, and Castle Learning software. Finally, we believe in the power of arts-based and civics enrichment for ELLs to build schema and community among our ELL student body and their families. All ESL students in the Title III program will attend four events at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, twice during both the fall and spring semester (TBD). In the fall, students will attend TBD on TBD. (Performance description here: BAM has not yet released student programs for Fall 2016. They will also attend TBD on TBD at BAM which (performance description). Materials will include schema-building curriculum developed by BAM and modified for ELLs by our ESL teacher, Ms. Lifschutz. These activities support the argumentative writing unit developed by Ms. Lifschutz where students learn to tell their story utilizing mixed genres (video, short story, photo journalism). It will also support a unit in photo journalism and memoir. In addition, content-specific support materials will be made available to teachers through an electronic list-serve format or on file in the ELL Resource Library. Additional texts for this library will be purchased with Title III funds, and the library will be housed in the ESL classroom/computer lab. This library will focus on both books on language acquisition strategies as well as lower-level content area texts for use during our Title III literacy/writing classes. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 2018-19 CEP 52  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: PART C: Professional Development Our Principal, Anna Maria Mule, Educational Consultants, will periodically address content area teachers throughout September and October to review general information on ELLs and language acquisition. This will take place by email, individual meetings during teacher prep periods, teacher workshops , and grade-level meetings on Tuesdays and after school on other days. Beginning in November and continuing throughout the school year, teachers will provided with strategies to incorporate ELL modifications into lesson plans during these sessions. Some of the topics addressed included college and career preparation, scaffolding and close reading strategies, using assessment to inform instruction. These regular meetings compose the majority of teacher professional development in teaching English Language Learners, unless the teacher decides to participate in one of the trainings offered by the New York City Department of Education. During these meetings, curriculum and resources are discussed with content area teachers working with ELLs. Our ESL teacher either provides additional resources for ELLs or commits to finding them for student use. A variety of suggestions of ESL modifications are made to content area teachers, and often our ESL teacher , principal, Educational Consultants, and network support specialists will outline and model a QTEL (Quality Teaching to English Learners) task or AVID literacy strategies that would be appropriate for the curriculum. Teachers often discuss specific concerns they having with ELL students in their classrooms. Teachers working in the Title III program will attend professional development provided by AVID (at cost) FSC and central. This pd will positively impact the progress of ELLs by providing coherent high quality instruction across grades and subject matter and provide teachers with scaffolding techniques as well as best practices in assessment in order to monitor student progress. Once classes are equalized in mid-September 2017, our ELL Coordinator, will use ELL schedules to create a table showing how they are grouped and which content area teachers are working with the largest number of Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs. These teachers will be invited to participate in a study group on the strategies mentioned above using content area curricula. These sessions will be facilitated by Ms. Lifschutz, and will meet throughout the school year. Dates and times will be determined by teacher availability, but contact hours for the study group will total 40 hours. The following sessions are provided to teachers of ELLs, including the Title III teachers: Dates, Times, Topic and Provider Monday, TBD (2:40-4:00 pm) Assessment and student success in a differentiated classroom for ELLs, provider Anna Maria Mule' (Principal) - whole faculty Monday, TBD (2:40-4:00 pm) Socratic Seminar and reaching Consensus for ELLs, providers: TBD (teachers) - whole faculty 2018-19 CEP 53  Part C: Professional Development Monday, TBD (2:40-4:00 pm) Strategies for Quality Instruction for English Learners - Anna Maria Mule' (Principal) whole Faculty Monday, TBD (2:40-4:00 pm) QTEL - "Are Laws Silent in Times of War:The Case of Korematsu v. United States" (1944) - Anna Maria Mule'. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In accordance with the 4 pillars, we believe that parent engagement is of vital importance for the continued academic success of our students. In general, our ELL parents are involved with and supportive of their child's education. They are readily available by phone. We hold parent workshops on Saturdays and during evenings to make parents of ELLs aware of resources available throughout New York City, including libraries, free English classes, and continuing education opportunities offered though the Department of Education , college and career awareness, and college application process. Art Cultural Activities for Students and parents will take place . Parent workshops on College Awareness for Parents of ELLs, Demystifying the College Application Process for Parents of ELLs, Communicating with Students, Common Core Standards (ELA), Common Core Standards (Math), Common Core Standards, (literacy); Utilizing Skedula effectively will take place throughout the school year in the evenings (5:30 - 7:00 pm) and during the day (10:00 - 11:30 am). Financial Aid Workshop for Parents of ELLs: ( A.M. Ms. Warren, College Advisor), TBD (AVID for ELLs), TBD (Partnership with Children - Communicating with your Teens as a parent of an ELL (PM). Translation will be provided by school staff (Ms. Warren, College Advisor, Ms. Panagoulias (Guidance Counselors) and (ESL teacher). Ms. Lifschutz. We will hold these sessions on the second Wednesday of the month in November, December, February and March, April and May. Our priority is to create a school environment where parents feel welcome and see the value of creating time to participate in school activities. Parents are always invited to outings on weeknights or weekends (performances, etc), and will be included in our Interdisciplinary Arts/Civics Enrichment outings (See Part B narrative). Parents have an open invitiation to attend any field trip the ESL class takes during the school day. Parents are kept abreast of school activities by phone contact or letters from the ESL teachers and guidance counselors. Parent outreach logs are maintained by our ESL teacher and are available to all faculty on our school website. Workshop agendas as well as sign in sheets will be held in the principal's office in a Title III binder. 2018-19 CEP 54 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for afterschool and Saturday program School Trips Food /Saturday- Pm program Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 8000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1,366 2500 500 2018-19 CEP 55  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 0 School Name Cobble Hill School of American Studies Borough Brooklyn School Number 519 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anna Maria Mule Coach Rebecca Krucoff ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Louise Bauso Teacher/Subject Area Angela Carrasco, Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Dominique Cocklin, Science Related-Service Provider Pamela Weadick Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Elizabeth Rodriguez Coach Melissa Moskowitz School Counselor Amira Myerson Parent Yves Lafontant Parent Coordinator Wanda Sheffield Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 0 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 56  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 601 Total number of ELLs 46 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Each semester our ELLs are administered the ELL Periodic Assessment to determine reading skills and a performance-based assessment (argumentative essay) to determine writing skills. With data from the ELL Periodic Assessment, we are able to determine trends across classes and give targeted instruction in certain reading and writing skills. In the case of the performance-based assessment, we administer a diagnostic that is scored using a gap analysis. Later in the semester, students are administered a PBA with modified targets in curricula. This is based on Common Core Skills that our students are challenged by according to the initial gap anaylsis. PBA instruction is based on gap analysis, and is this assessment is used consistently across all departments. The topic of the essay always relates to the content that is being taught in our integrated (History and ENL) classes. We are able to assess whether students acquire the skills necessary, and compare them with their native-speaker peers. This enables us to target ELL-specific challenges and content. 2018-19 CEP 57  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We look at credit accumulation, or, more specifically, the percentage of ELLs who are on target for grade level and acquiring ten credits per school year. This report is written at the end of each semester. Based on the report cards for the first marking period this school year, 75% of our ELLs are on track for credit accumulation. Intervention in the form of after school tutoring is being pursued for those students who are struggling with credit accumulation. We look at the percentage of students who are making progress on the NYSESLAT as well as the percentage who are testing proficient. Last year we tested 43 students on all four sections of the NYSESLAT. Of this group, 10 students tested out at Proficient (23.2, up from 11.9% the previous school year). 8 students remained at the same proficiency level (19%, down from 57% the previous school year). Finally, 35 students moved up 1-2 proficiency levels (81%, up from 43% the previous school year). We look at Regents scores to determine if ELLs are on track for graduation, and to determine any extra tutoring or scaffolding that might be needed. We meet regularly with content-area teachers to get anecdotal evidence regarding student progress in English-language classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have received six new admits to the New York City school system so far during the 2014-2105 school year, and based on handscores, five of the six were deemed eligible for ELL services according to NYSITELL testing. Three tested at the entering level, and two were placed at the Emerging level of ENL classes. The majority of our students move through proficiency levels according to standard language acquisition patterns. In general, students' progress is consistent with academic findings (3-5 years for Basic Interpersonal Commuicative Skills (BICS) and 4-7 years for Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP)). In this section, we have organized our narrative of 2015 NYSESLAT data based on the changing proficiency levels of the students that participated in our ESL program during the 2014-2015 school year, since this gives us the most insight into the effectiveness of our program. In the administration of the 2015 NYSESLAT, there were 10 beginning level students tested that remained at our school, so we have access to testing data and can analyze their results. Four of the ten remained at the Entering level. Two of these students were being NYSESLAT-tested for the first time, and the other two are in the initial phases of Special Education testing (one has already been placed in an ICT classroom). Three of the ten moved on to the Emerging level, two to the Transitioning level, and one to the Expanding level. We have access to the NYSESLAT results of twelve students who were at the Intermediate level of ESL classes at Cobble Hill last 2018-19 CEP 58  year. Of these twelve, five tested at the Transitioning level and seven tested at the Expanding level. Of these seven, four were met exit criteria when they passed the English Regents exam, and now receive two periods of ENL coursework each week. This group all shows signs of moving through proficiency levels according to language acquisition patterns, but a more thorough analysis will be possible next year, when we will be able to compare two years of results of the updated NYSESLAT exam. Nine advanced level students were NYSESLAT-tested last spring, and three remained at the Expanding level, while six tested at Commanding. We gave careful consideration to students in all grades who did not show progress moving up through the proficiency levels, and the vast majority of the time, remaining at the same level seemed to correspond to the length of time the student had spent acquiring the English and the student's literacy awareness in the native language. There are also considerations such as special needs factors (Special Education or SIFE classified students), as well as the dramatic reworking of the NYSESLAT exam; however, the majority of our students whose test scores we are able to analyze (27/31, or 87%) moved up at least one proficiency level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have our ENL students divided into three groups this year to meet new state mandates. Entering and Emerging level students are combined into a double period class that meets daily. One half of this class is integrated with history content, and the other half is integrated with English content. The content goals of the course look at migration (forced and voluntary) to the United States by using history and literary texts in a variety of genres. This semester's theme delves into race-based exclusion in United States History, and is supplemented with two events at Brooklyn Academy of Music: a live performance and a screening of a documentary about the Central Park Five. This class is ungraded and heterogeneous. Entering-level students also receive a third period with our ENL teacher that is coded as an ENL class for language support. They attend this section independent of Entering level students, and the curriculum is constantly adjusting to support their content ENL course, as well as their other content area coursework. The Academic Vocabulary Toolkit is used daily in this section, and the class is ungraded and homogeneously grouped. Transitioning and Expanding level students are grouped together and receive 4-5 periods of ENL a week, which is coded as a History course. This is a modified version of the immigration course described at the Emerging and Entering levels, though less texts are used due to time constraints, and there is a greater focus on academic writing and computer literacy skills. This group is ungraded and heterogeneous, though 9 th grade students are able to receive an additional 5 th period of ENL each week, independent of the other grades at this level. Students who were deemed proficient by testing at the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT, or meeting exit criteria through a combined score of expanding on the NYSESLAT and 65% or higher on the English Regents receive two 2018-19 CEP 59  periods of ENL coursework per week. This class focuses on writing skills, since this is the modality former ELLs struggle with most upon exiting second language support programs like ENL. This group is ungraded and homogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering level ELLs are mandated to receive three units of study of ENL per week, one of which must be stand-alone ENL, and one of which must be integrated. We meet these mandates by delivering integrated instruction with a dually certified (ESOL and Social Studies 7-12). Entering students receive three periods of instruction with this teacher daily. These three periods are coded as History, English, and ESOL, totalling 675 minutes per week. Emerging level ELLs are mandated to receive two units of study of ENL per week, one of which must be stand-alone ENL, and one of which must be integrated. We meet these mandates by delivering integrated instruction with a dually certified (ESOL and Social Studies 7-12). Emerging-level students receive two periods of instruction with this teacher daily. These two periods are coded as History and English, totalling 450 minutes per week. Transitioning and Expanding level ELLs are mandated to receive one unit of study of ENL per week, which must be integrated. We meet these mandates by delivering integrated instruction with a dually certified (ESOL and English, House certification). Transitioning and Expanding level students receive one period of instruction with this teacher daily. This period is coded as English and totals 180-225 minutes per week, depending on grade level. Commanding level students receive 2 periods of ENL per week as English credit. We meet this mandate by delivering integrated instruction with a dually certified teacher (ESOL and English, House certification). This class is worth 0.25 credits per semester. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content goals integrated ENL courses deal with migration (forced and voluntary) to the United States by using history and literary texts in a variety of genres. This semester's theme delves into race-based exclusion in United States History, and is supplemented with two events at Brooklyn Academy of Music: a live performance and a screening of a documentary about the Central Park Five. All texts highlight the personal stories of historical characters to portray larger historical trends in American history, presented chronologically and ranging from Pocohontas to students at Little Rock Central High School during integration. These vignettes provide points of entry for students in that they can draw on personal schema to relate to the challenges faced by these historical personages. Material is presented in the native language when it is available, and thematic links are drawn between each phase of the curriculum. Performance-based assessments take the form of 2018-19 CEP 60  argumentative essays using primary sources. Gallery walks, cooperative activities, and the writing process are used consistently throughout the course. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels will work in this History and ELA integrated setting. Entering-level students also receive a third period with our ENL teacher that is coded as an ENL class for language support. They attend this section independent of Entering level students, and the curriculum is constantly adjusting to support their content ENL course, as well as their other content area coursework. The Academic Vocabulary Toolkit is used daily in this section, and the class is ungraded and homogeneously grouped. ENL students receiving integrated English instruction work with a curriculum published by Scenarios, USA, which uses student-made films as texts for designing and writing a screenplay. These activities are modified for second-language learners' language needs. Themes include love and solidarity, and the sequence uses writing and film to foster youth leadership, advocacy, and self-expression. The films help students identify and analyze social norms - especially those involving race, class, sexual orientation, and gender - that shape indeivideual identity. The curriculum is inquiry-driven though facilitated discussion and project-based learning. The activities have been designed to engage students of all abilities and learning styles to write, read, research, and present information and their poitns of view. students will analyze and critique different types of texts, including film scripts and non-fiction texts about the social justice and health topics that are the subjects of the films. They will also build pieces of a narrative, such as creating fictional characters and writing dialogue. These larning activities in the curriculum will help students meet the highest Common Core State Standards for English Language arts in all five strands. They also foster self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding levels will work in this integrated ELA setting. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Throughout the year, students periodically complete writing assignments in native language, after which the assignments are read and evaluated by staff members who speak the same language. In addition, Spanish-speaking students are given the Spanish LAB upon arrival at school and use internet resources in Spanish. In-class writing assignments are often drafted in the native language. Formal writing assignments are sometimes also requested in the native language; for example, students may read an article in the native language and provide a paragraph summary in both English and a translation in the native language. These are then peer-reviewed or graded by a faculty member who speaks the target language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. There is urgency to provide academic intervention services as an extension of the regular school program on both push in and pull out services for our 12 SIFE students. We will take the following steps with these students: • Making an individualized student needs assessment. • Grade appropriate instructional support materials • Differentiation of instruction in all areas b. When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition: • An informal student orientation • Language partner system identifying a native language bilingual student in his/her class that will assist during the day • Encourage student to participate in after school activities and tutoring. • An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. 2018-19 CEP 61  • Home-school communication. • Content-area glossaries are provided c. For those students receiving 4-6 years of service, we use the following procedures and resources to support our aim of having students reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT during this time period and before becoming long-term ELLs: • All students are encouraged to attend after school programs and tutoring before school. • There is focus of vocabulary acquisition, and students given access to online software (Membean) in addition to the vocabulary explicitly taught as it relates to the ENL curriculum. • There is also a strong focus on writing, in which ELLs in this subgroup receive the lowest scores on the NYSESLAT. Students compose and publish a minimum of three portfolio items per marking period, including poetry, narrative memoir, research, and essays. Homework assignments are primarily journal entries. d. An analysis of long-term ELL scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments suggests that their problem is one of reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves. • Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs • Encourage their participation in Empower 3000 and extracurricular programs to enrich their language and academic skills. e. For the past two years we have had 12-23% of our ELL students reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT. A year of transitional support is available to these students in their continuing participation in the ESL program, but we do not give each child this automatically and instead make a decision on a case-by-case basis through a conversation between our ESL teacher, Assistant Principal, and Guidance Counselor. At this point we have two students opting for transitional support. All prior ELLs continue to receive testing accommodations for two years following their exit from the ESL program. These accommodations were outlined in a letter from the superintendent in September 2008 and include the following: • Time extension (time and a half) • Separate location (ELLs and Former ELLs are generally tested together) • Third reading of the Listening Selection on the English Regents Exam. • Bilingual glossaries are provided for use during state tests • Simultaneous use of English and Alternate Language Editions of state exams is approved for use by ELLs and Former ELLs • For lower-incidence languages, we use school faculty or a hired translator to give students an oral translation of state tests. • When taking a state test in with a native language translation, students are allowed to write their responses in their native language as well. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All curricula are created on-site by our ENL teacher and reflect academic/graduation needs of students. For example, literacy instruction always includes subject-area content, with a primary focus on social studies. Most of the materials used are non-fiction/informational, and include journalism, memoir, documentary and primary sources. These are supplemented with non-informational sources such as poetry, fiction, and artwork. Computer literacy skills are a large part of the curriculum; students are often asked to retrieve and analyze content information from online sources. Listening and note-taking skills are a daily part of the curriculum to promote college readiness. Students often listen to brief excerpts from college-level lectures and take scaffolded notes. Students must communicate for information on a daily basis, through collaborative or cooperative learning activities. Students further develop all four modalities by engaging in public speaking activities, writing and delivering speeches to their classmates. Strategies are constantly evolving based upon a highly diverse student population which changes dramatically from year to year. 2018-19 CEP 62  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Scheduling flexibility is used in the case of students who are moved to a higher-level class than their NYSESLAT scores would indicate, based upon in-class performance and the observations of ENL teachers. After reviewing IEP testing modifications, these are applied to classroom instruction at the teachers' discretion (i.e. modified materials, extended time, scribes, modified responses, etc.). Curriculuar flexibility is apparent in the availability of student choice in assignments and assessments. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At the beginning of the school year, our ELL Coordinator prepares a packet for all content area teachers of ELLs that notifies them of which of their students are ELLs and what proficiency level each has tested out. Group lists of ELLs in each content area class are provided so that mainstream teachers can see which other teachers they share students with. In addition, this packet gives information on • proficiency descriptions and entitlement • Former ELLs and testing modifications • Scaffolds for ELLs in the Mainstream Classroom • Differentiation Tasks for ELLs • Modified Test Questions Examples for ELLs • Writing Samples and recommendations for ELLs The purpose of this packet is to provide mainstream teachers with tools in which to offer appropriate interventions and modifications for ELLs. We have several structures in place and available to ELLs in the content areas as targeted intervention. Each ELL student participates in one or more of the following, depending on their needs. Interventions for Content Area Subjects: Math • Students are trained to use native language support website jmap.org, and must attend after school sessions where they watch appropriate lessons in their native language and take notes in their notebooks. Finally, Entering level ELL students may participate in a student tutoring program with bilingual students who have tested out of ELL services. All Arabic-speaking, Spanish, or Haitian-Creole speaking ESL students can meet with our bilingual math teachers Maysa Jarara, Julio Sanchez, or Bernard Derys for after school tutoring. Science • Our ELL Coordinator meets with the science teacher working with the greatest number of ELLs each week and offers suggestions of interventions for these students. Modified/Translated science materials have been purchased from National Geographic and Access Science. Finally, Entering-level ESL students may participate in after school tutoring with bilingual students who have tested out of ELL services. Social Studies • Our ELL Coordinator meets with the history teacher working with the greatest number of ELLs each week and offers suggestions of interventions for these students. Modified/Translated history materials have been purchased from National Geographic and Access Science. Finally, Entering-level ESL students may participate in after school tutoring with bilingual students who have tested out of ELL services. 2018-19 CEP 63  ELA • Our ENL teacher meets with the English department during grade level conferences once a week to keep abreast of ELA units of study. For Expanding and Commanding-level ELLs, their ENL classwork addresses the same skills and genres as they are working on in their ELA classes. This functions as an intervention where students have extra practice with each skill and strategy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New Programs being considered: - English Language Learners have access to our two major elective programs: these include our 4 year Pre-Law program and our new 3 year - Project Lead the Way Stem programs in Biomedical Sciences and Intro to Engineering. These courses of study are designed to provide students with early access to careers in the sciences and in the humanities providing students an important bridge to college levell work. We are also making a concerted effort to support our Ells in the passing of the Regents exam in ELA with a 75 so that they have access to our College Now Partnership with City Tech and an opportunity to earn college credits before high school graduation. -21 st Century Learning Grant is in our 3 rd year. We made an improvement to our extracurricular programming by adding soccer, which was widely sought after, especially by our Ells. - The AVID elective is being implemented for all students in all grades. This advisory class meets 5 times a week and provides students and opportunity to learn about, practice and eventually internalize the soft skills necessary for success in post-secondary education, such as inquiry, close-reading, writing across content areas, organization and collaborative skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs are being discontinued at this point. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ENL students are afforded equal access to school programs. This is accomplished by daily announcements in the ENL classroom, which are translated when necessary. Parent outreach is common and a luxury we are afforded by having such a small program within Cobble Hill. Our ELL Coordinator is in regular contact with all ELL parents, as is our bilingual Parent Coordinator. Extracurricular school programs available at Cobble Hill include Step Team, Leadership Council, Cheerleading, Crochet Club, Mocktrial, Community Service & tutoring. This is in addition to Martial Arts, Moot Court, track, baseball team, and soccer team. Our ELLs are particularly encouraged to participate in an play-writing/improvisation program called "Opening Act" as it promotes ease in oral language development. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All proficiency levels participate in a similar curriculum with modifed texts and tasks. Themes this year include immigration, microaggressions and racial profiling, "This I Believe” and novel studies. The following instructional methods and technology are used: • Online profiles, blogging, and commenting on www.youthvoices.net/cobblehill • Language lab playlists on www.goorulearning.org for targetted grammar and writing instruction. • Spelling software for students who are struggling in transitioning from their alphabet system (Annenburg Learner Spelling Interactives) • Animated powerpoints for introductory projects and literature response (www.powtoon.com) • QTEL tasks • Guided research and collaborative reading strategies 2018-19 CEP 64  • Writing Workshop Model and peer-to-peer conferencing Texts • "We Were There, Too!" Ed. Phillip Hoose • Teacher-selected short stories and novels • “This I Believe” Sample Essays • BAM Teacher guide for screening of the documentary “Little Rock” • Teacher-generated worksheets/matrixes/projects • Teacher-selected film/music/images to support student contextualization • assorted picture books addressing related science/history content • multiple sources to build schema on unit topics, including film clips, artwork, music, and poetry • Bilingual Content-Area Glossaries • All writing published in google drive Instructional Materials for Newcomers • Supportive websites: www.usalearns.org (English), • www.jmap.org (Mathematics) • Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (AVT) • Multigenre classroom library of both informational texts and fiction • All Writing published in google drive Instructional Materials for 4-6 Years of Service • Academic Encounters in Reading/Writing and Listening) (Brown and Hood/Cambridge UP) • www.jmap.org (Mathmathics) • Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (AVT) • Grammar Connections (Heinle/Cengage) • Multi-genre classroom library of both informational texts and fiction • Bilingual content-area glossaries • Practice tests for Regents preparation Instructional Materials for Long-Term ELLs All materials for 4-6 years of service, as well as: • www.castlelearning.com Instructional Materials for Students with Disabilities • www.usalearns.org • Grammar Connections On a case-by-case basis, content area teachers and our ESL instructors provide materials specific to students’ ages and grade levels. We are in the process of compiling a resource library with multi-level resources for all topics within our content area classes’ scope and sequence. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Multimedia projects including native language interviews with peers and parents are an integral part of classwork and assessment. Our research often make use of native language sources that the students must cite and summarize in the target langauge of English. Bilingual dictionaries and word-to-word glossaries are available for all languages present in the ENL classroom. Cognates are 2018-19 CEP 65  explicitly taught to students speaking Latinate languages. Often the ESL teacher pauses at an important vocabulary word and has higher level students translate into all of the languages present in the room. Online videos showing math lessons are made available to students in English, and are also available in Spanish on www.jmap.org. When possible, we include native language support for ELLs in content-area classrooms as well. This policy includes: • Each student being provided with a native-language word-to-word glossary for their content area classes if it is beneficial to the student. • All ELLs travel with a bilingual dictionary for all of their classes • Teachers are instructed to use translation software and images for important terms within their curriculum. • All math lessons are available to students in English or Spanish using the Pearson website. • Student and teacher translators are available for Spanish and Arabic, our primary two language groups. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support materials are chosen to be grade and age appropriate. While our ENL classrooms support English language development, all instruction is presented within the parameters of a high school curriculum. The library in our ENL classroom is well-stocked with high-interest, age-appropriate texts. One incentive to attending Parent Teacher Conferences are the book fairs that take place in the ENL classroom on these nights. Any whole class texts are selected for their age-appropriate content and accessible language. For example, a text that has been frequently taught to our ENL students over the years is "Enrique's Journey" by Sonia Nazario. This Pulitzer-prize winning text deals with current and relevant content, but is written in the present tense, is available on audiobook, and has been translated into several language. It is though scaffolds like these that we are able to present our ENL students with age-appropriate materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All proficiency levels participate in a similar curriculum with modifed texts and tasks. Themes this year include immigration, microaggressions and racial profiling, "This I Believe” and novel studies. The following instructional methods and technology are used: • Online profiles, blogging, and commenting on www.youthvoices.net/cobblehill • Language lab playlists on www.goorulearning.org for targetted grammar and writing instruction. • Spelling software for students who are struggling in transitioning from their alphabet system (Annenburg Learner Spelling Interactives) • Animated powerpoints for introductory projects and literature response (www.powtoon.com) • QTEL tasks • Guided research and collaborative reading strategies • Writing Workshop Model and peer-to-peer conferencing Texts • "We Were There, Too!" Ed. Phillip Hoose • Teacher-selected short stories and novels • “This I Believe” Sample Essays • BAM Teacher guide for screening of the documentary “Little Rock” • Teacher-generated worksheets/matrixes/projects • Teacher-selected film/music/images to support student contextualization • assorted picture books addressing related science/history content • multiple sources to build schema on unit topics, including film clips, artwork, music, and poetry • Bilingual Content-Area Glossaries • All writing published in google drive 2018-19 CEP 66  Instructional Materials for Newcomers • Supportive websites: www.usalearns.org (English), • www.jmap.org (Mathematics) • Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (AVT) • Multigenre classroom library of both informational texts and fiction • All Writing published in google drive Instructional Materials for 4-6 Years of Service • Academic Encounters in Reading/Writing and Listening) (Brown and Hood/Cambridge UP) • www.jmap.org (Mathmathics) • Academic Vocabulary Toolkit (AVT) • Grammar Connections (Heinle/Cengage) • Multi-genre classroom library of both informational texts and fiction • Bilingual content-area glossaries • Practice tests for Regents preparation Instructional Materials for Long-Term ELLs All materials for 4-6 years of service, as well as: • www.castlelearning.com Instructional Materials for Students with Disabilities • www.usalearns.org • Grammar Connections On a case-by-case basis, content area teachers and our ESL instructors provide materials specific to students’ ages and grade levels. We are in the process of compiling a resource library with multi-level resources for all topics within our content area classes’ scope and sequence. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As another support to ELLs, we offer a bridge program for incoming 9th graders the summer before they begin their freshman year. Surprisingly, only one current 9th grade ELL participated in the Bridge Program this year, which acclimates students to high school procedures and curriculum. Unfortunately, the majority of our new admits arrive during the school year and unable to participate in the Bridge Program. ELLs who enroll throughout the school year receive a variety of support to help them acclimate to their new school: • the use of a native language partner/tutor • a school tour is conducted by a native language peer 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All ELLs take Spanish coursework for graduation requirement, and native speakers take the LOTE exam. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 67  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Content area teachers meet with our ENL teacher on a monthly basis during school common planning time. Often content area teachers who are struggling with their ELLs choose to spend additional time for articulation during lunch breaks or prep periods. These meetings are either one-on-one or small groups based on the content area. These regular meetings compose the majority of teacher professional development in teaching English Language Learners, unless the teacher decides to participate in one of the trainings offered by the New York City Department of Education. During these meetings, curriculum and resources are discussed. Our ENL teacher either provides additional resources for ELLs or commits to finding them for student use. A variety of suggestions of ELL modifications are made to content area teachers, and often our ENL teacher will outline and model a QTEL (Quality Teaching to English Learners) task that would be appropriate for the curriculum. Teachers often discuss specific concerns they having with ELL students in their classrooms. The time spent on articulation and professional development far exceeds the mandatory 7.5 hours required by the Department of Education. Professional development is provided by school staff and organizations and trainers workshops coordinated the New York City Department of English Language Learners. School Staff: Within the schools Professional Development program, the focus is on: • Familiarizing staff with language proficiency levels, ELL identification procedures, and ELL scaffolds. • Collaboration and conferencing between content area teachers and our ESL instructor. • Communication of ESL strategies and methods through electronic and written memorandums. Workshops taken by our ENL teacher have included: • Teaching the Holocaust to English Language Learners, Museum of Jewish Heritage, August 2008 • Conversation Partner Training, International Center of New York, September 2008 • Presidential Elections Past and Present, Museum of the City of New York, November 2008 • Quality Teaching of English Learners (QTEL) for English Language Arts, 6 sessions, November 2008-February 2009 • BESIS Orientation, December 2008 • World Languages Education for Our Future: Curriculum, Practices, Resources, and Technology, February 2009 • Shakespeare Teaches Teachers, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Spring 2009 • Off the Hook: Playwriting for Teens, Falconworks, Spring 2009 • Exploring Identity: Museum of Modern Art, March 2009 • Seminar on Race and Racism, Cullman Center for Writers and Scholars, New York City Public Library, July 2009 • Facing History and Ourselves Immigration Seminar, July 2010, Race and Exclusion, July 2012 • Journeys of Nonviolence: Gandhi and Chavez, Ahimsa Center, Cal Poly at Pomona, July-August 2011 • Writing Matters, August 2012 • Seminar, Chicago Architechture Foundation, July 2013 • Youth Voices Seminar at Lehman College, hosted by the New York City Writing Project, July 2014 All pertinent information from these trainings is turn-keyed to content area teachers. 2018-19 CEP 68  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners through our 80 minute professional devlopment sessions on Monday afternoon dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners as well as literacy development through QTEL and AVID training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. In general, our ELL parents are involved with and supportive of their child's education. They are readily available by phone. However, many of them have difficulty making it to events due to work constraints. This statement could be extended to the majority of the parents at our school. Parent teacher conferences take place four times a year, and parents are notified in writing and asked to respond. If no response is received, they are notified by phone. All parents are invited to participate in the Parent Teacher Organization. Our ESL teacher uses Title III money to create community with ELL parents by conducting a quarterly community film screening in the evening in the school auditorium. This film series screens POV documentaries related to immigration. Parents are always invited to outings on weeknights or weekends (performances, etc). Parents have an open invitiation to attend any fieldtrip the ESL class takes during the school day. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. This year we are looking into a partnership with Learning Leaders, a community based organization that offers free classes to parents. During orientation, we make parents aware of resources available throughout New York City, including libraries, free English classes, and continuing education opportunities offered though the Department of Education Our ESL teacher is in regular contact with parents and available to meet with them at any time. An extensive intake interview is conducted with parents when their child is admitted, and needs are ascertained at this meeting. Parents are kept abreast of school activities by phone contact or letters from the ESL teachers and guidance counselors. 2018-19 CEP 69  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 70 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Annamaria Mule, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 71  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Cobble Hill School of American School DBN: 15K519 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anna Maria Mule Title Principal Costas Constantinidis Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Louise Bauso ENL/Bilingual Teacher Guillermo Santacruz Parent Anna Bolman/History Teacher/Subject Area Sasha O'Connor/Science Teacher/Subject Area Rebecca Krucoff Coach Coach Amira Myerson School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 6/22/15 2018-19 CEP 72  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 15K519 School Name: Cobble Hill School of American Stu Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We are able to determine the language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication utilizing ATS, blue cars, parent surveys and parent interview by both our ELL coordinator and our parent coordinator. We post most of our important information on our school website, cobblehillhighschool.org, which is translated in over 50 languages including low-incidence languages. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 73 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parent preferences for both written and oral communication include: Mandarin, Arabic, Spanish, Russian, Haitian Creole, Polish, Hungarian 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Freshman Orientation letter, Summer Bridge letter, Saturday and Afterschool tutoring and prep program, student handbook, newsletters, guidance letters 4 times a year, extracurricular letters, 21 st Century Learning Applications, College Now applications etc, senior activities, student council activities, PTA activities. Most letters and information is posted on our school website which can be translated in over 50 languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 74  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have a number of parent meetings throughout the year: Monthly PTA meetings Yearly Cohort Guidance meetings Parent Family Night 2 times a year Parent-teacher Conferences 2 times a year Financial Aid meeting in December FAFSA meeting 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 75  We will conduct a parent survey twice a year to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 CEP 76 
