2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K528 School Name: THE HIGH SCHOOL FOR GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP Principal: MICHELLE ROCHON 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The High School for Global Citizenship 17K528 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 331700011528 9-12 883 Classon Ave 718-230-6300 School Number (DBN): 718-230-6301 Fax: Marsha Gordon Mgordon11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 17 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Michelle Rochon Jeremy Bucaria Ms. Sandra Clarke Kabeya Mbuyi Ms. Jewel John Alexandra Freeman Alana George Frank Teah District Information Clarence Ellis Superintendent: District 17 cellis3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-221-4372 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Field Support Center FSC: MauricieredeGovia Executive Director: 415 89 th Street – 4 th Floor – Room 407 Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn, NY 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)240-3677 Phone Number: (718)935-3909 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michelle Rochon Jeremy Bucaria Ms. Sandra Clarke Hayden Grant Ms. Jewel John Kilkenny Alana George Alexandra Freeman-Lewis Frank Teah Kabeya Mbuyi Kino Quashie *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CSA UFT PA 2018-19 CEP 5  Michael Clark Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PA PA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT The High School for Global Citizenship is a community of active learners and problem solvers who are engaged participants in a multidisciplinary and experiential approach to learning both in and outside of the classroom. Our 2018-19 CEP 9  school is committed to both academic achievement at the highest standards and to the promotion of diversity, justice, human rights, and the democratic process. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located in the Prospect Heights area of Brooklyn, the High School for Global Citizenship is a small school with a big vision. Our motto is "Bridging the gap between the classroom and the world." WHAT IS GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP? Global Citizenship describes individuals who share an awareness of and a concern for the health and well-being of humanity and our planet. Global Citizens recognize that certain current issues and problems require global attention and action. 5 TENETS OF GLOBAL CITIZENSHIP These priorities include the promotion of: ● PEACE – the non-violent resolution of conflict; ● JUSTICE– the guarantee of a standard of living above poverty and basic human rights for all; ● SUSTAINABILITY – the responsible development and protection of our natural environment and resources; ● DIVERSITY – tolerance of and respect for differences across humanity; and, ● DEMOCRATIC PARTICIPATION – the right to participate and express an opinion in one’s government and political process. GLOBAL CITIZENS ● Recognize that these goals have not yet been universally achieved in today’s world. ● Understand the connections between their local actions and experiences and what is happening in the rest of the world. ● Use this awareness and understanding to effect positive change in the world. OUR STUDENTS WILL ● Develop skills and attitudes necessary for success in college and in the 21st century economy, including constant and active learning, effective communication, problem-solving skills, and effort/perseverance. 2018-19 CEP 10  ● Acquire specific content knowledge and skills, will be able to meet New York State Commencement Learning Standards and requirements for graduation, and will demonstrate academic readiness for competitive colleges/universities. ● Gain a heightened awareness of current issues facing our global community and will develop a global perspective (which includes a foundation of knowledge about global conditions and events, empathy/concern for condition of others, and recognition of their power to effect positive change in the world). HSGC ACHIEVES ITS MISSION BY ● Creating a school culture based on high expectations for student learning and behavior; ● Designing our curriculum and core learning experiences around problems and questions; ● Making the curriculum interdisciplinary, interconnected, and focused on global issues; ● Providing opportunities for students to learn and experience their learning inside and outside the classroom; ● Offering multiple layers of support to our students THREE GUIDING PRINCIPLES of HSGC ● ONE MIC: One person speaks at a time. Give full attention to the speaker. Listen actively and wait patiently to speak. ● SAFE SPACE: Help create a space in which everyone feels comfortable sharing ideas. Show respect by honoring everyone's physical and mental space. ● PARTICIPATION: Actively engage in all activities. Get involved by bringing a positive attitude, open mind, focused listening and critical ideas to class. PARTNERSHIPS We have several strategic partnerships that help us to achieve our mission. Please see a detailed list at http://www.hs-gc.org/#!partnerships/c1tjb . Our leading partner is Global Kids. WHAT WE OFFER College and Career Readiness ● College Advisory classes for all grades to guide students through each step of the college application process ● College/career centered school-wide events: Career Day, College Rush Week, College Pride Days, SAT Registration Drive ● Peer Leader Program: students spend 4 days/3 nights at a college to train as leaders to mentor their peers in school year ● College tours to various CUNY, SUNY, and private college institutions ● Careers in Focus Program: attend career panels, job shadowing days and participate half-day internships 2018-19 CEP 11  EXCITING, RIGOROUS COURSES AP CLASSES Calculus, US History, English Literature & Composition, English Language & Composition, Seminar, Computer Science COLLEGE CREDIT COURSES Students can take college courses at Medgar Evers College (3 blocks away!), Long Island University & Monroe College ADVANCED STEM CLASSES Principles of Biomedical Science, Computer Science, Chemistry, Anatomy & Physiology, Algebra 2/Trigonometry 21 st CENTURY STEM EDUCATION ● CTE Courses (Engineering, Film and Media, Construction, Culinary Arts, etc.) offered in partnerhsip with the STEAM Center and Brooklyn Navy Yard  Brand new Mac computer lab ● Hands-on lab experience ● New science lab equipment ● Attend various conferences including Columbia University’s Engineering Exploration Experience (E3), Ten80 STEM Challenge, STEM Matters/Citizen Science Research Symposium, and Made with Code by Google ● STEM partnerships with Project Lead the Way, Girls Who Code/ Black Girls Code, Brooklyn on Tech, ScriptEd, and more! EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING TRAVELING THE WORLD HSGC Students travel the world. Places have included: * Bosnia * Costa Rica * Kenya * Thailand * Heifer Ranch, Arkansas * * Washington, DC * Philadelphia, PA * and more * COMMUNITY SERVICE REQUIREMENT At HSGC, we require all students to perform 25 hours of community service each year in order to graduate, totally 100 hours over the 4 years. We organize several community service events throughout the year including an annual breast cancer walk and blood drives. ENRICHING STUDENT LIFE PERFORMING ARTS ACTIVITIES: 2018-19 CEP 12  ● Chorus, Musical Theater, and Hip-Hop Dance through Purelements; Step through Break the Stage OTHER CLUBS: ● National Honor Society, Peer Leaders, Girls Who Code Club, Game Design Club, Student Government SPORTS TEAMS: ● Basketball, Indoor and Outdoor Track, Cross Country, Soccer, Cricket, Swimming, Weight training SCHOOL-WIDE EVENTS: ● Talent show, staff v. student basketball game, monthly assemblies, and more 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL needs language acquisition support. SWD and level 1 students need mandatory AIS. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Per our most Recent QR findings What the school does well and Area of The school carefully leverages time, staff, and other resources to support instructional goals aimed at accelerating student learning and improving teacher practice across the school. (1.3) ● The school uses its resources to achieve its instructional goals aimed at raising the level of teacher effectiveness and increasing student progress. Following careful analysis of student and teacher performance data, the school leveraged a number of resources to meet its goals. First, the school identified the 9 th grade as a critical year to ensure credit accumulation and on-time graduation. To that end, all incoming 9th grade students are invited to participate in a robust summer bridge program. To further address student learning needs in literacy and mathematics, student programming across the school supports three levels of classes: ramp-up, regular, and honors. ● Ramp-up provides one hundred minutes of English language arts instruction separated into two classes: one focused on developing reading skills and the other, writing skills. The school offers Advanced Placement English language arts and Seminar to students who meet the criteria of the class. The school leverages its budget as well as hiring and teacher assignments to strategically staff the additional courses, allowing for data-driven, individualized programming. Staff were selected and hired during the summer to teach these courses, and professional development and curricular design took place at that time and continues as job-embedded professional development. Teacher common planning and team time increased to five days a week, allowing staff to collaborate and receive weekly professional development geared toward meeting student learning needs, including English language learners and students with disabilities, as identified by diagnostic, formative and summative assessment data. Teachers and administrators commented that teacher team time focused on implementation of data-informed strategies has led to school-wide consistent practices and increased student progress. The school attributes its steady increase in 9 th grade credit accumulation from 58.33% back in 2012 to 87% in more recent years to the careful coordination of resources aimed at supporting teacher growth and improving student outcomes. 2018-19 CEP 13  School-wide assessment practices provide teachers with student data used to inform instructional decisions tailored to student learning needs that lead to increased student outcomes. (2.2) ● Periodic, teacher-created and curricula-aligned interim assessments and task-specific rubrics provide teachers with student performance data. Teachers use this data to revise planning to support student needs, collaboratively set student learning goals, co-establish action plans with students, and provide families with on-going communication about student progress. Coupled with progress reports provided three times per semester, these practices ensure that teachers can provide timely, data-informed feedback to students and their families about what they are doing well and what they need to improve. In addition, online performance data allows teachers and families to access and monitor student progress. Students commented that their teachers share assessment data with them frequently to support tracking of goals and action plans following interim assessments. Parents commented that they receive regular communication from teachers via email in addition to the online system and progress reports. Daily checks for understanding, formative and interim assessment data allow teachers to determine the content and skills that students know and are able to do while surfacing gaps in student learning. In-depth analysis of interim assessment data by teachers and reviewed by school leaders promotes on-going communication of student learning and leverages collaboration aimed at shifting teacher practice to align with student needs. Based on this data, teachers make adjustments to curricula and daily planning to re-teach identified gaps in content and skills. Students participate in the process of self-assessment by using rubrics to assess peers’ and their work prior to teacher feedback. Students also create their own performance data action plans with guidance from teachers. This school-wide articulated assessment approach and feedback loop is leading to increases in student progress. The school’s teacher team focus on improving the progress of its lowest third through the use of assessment data to modify instruction has resulted in removal off the New York State priority school list. Supporting pedagogical practice with feedback from observation of instruction, review of teacher planning, responsive professional development and peer support promotes continual improvement aligned to goals. (4.1) ● The school provides on-going, framework-aligned feedback to teachers focused on curricular planning, classroom practice, and student performance. Teachers reflect on practice before and after classroom observation, through the curricular planning revision process, and following student assessments. Teachers receive email and formal written feedback as well as engage in conversations with school leaders and colleagues about their work and next steps. In addition to feedback from school leaders, teachers provide each other with feedback and support through the systematic process of reviewing of curricula, lesson plans, classroom practice and student work/data. The school’s use of the Danielson Framework aligns school goals with the on-going development of pedagogical practice. Focused on rigorous and Common Core- aligned planning, the school provides a number of supports connected to the competency of planning and preparation. Teachers receive feedback on their maps, units, and lessons, as well as responsive, differentiated professional development to meet their needs. The school’s online curriculum mapping and unit planning system allows teachers to review colleagues’ curricula and provide reflective feedback. Teachers and school leaders commented on how this process promotes sharing of best practice and the adoption of strategies across grades and content. Teacher goals correlate with school goals and provide concrete alignment across the school, focused on: increasing student progress and performance as an outcome of unified work on curricular planning, questioning and discussion techniques, and assessment of student learning. Tracking of teacher growth across the school allows for responsive professional development. The school provides time for in depth curriculum mapping and unit planning, more opportunities for teachers to collaborate and for additional hours of professional development during the first semester which has led to all teachers writing effective lesson and unit plans aligned to the school’s suggested templates and stated criteria. Teacher team collaborations provide multiple opportunities for focused, ongoing professional development and collegial conversations aligned to school goals that work to improve teacher practice and student learning. (4.2) ● Teachers engage in multiple meetings each week, including content, inquiry, and grade level teams. The school provides daily dedicated time to focus on team work aligned to school goals. Each department has articulated data-driven goals aligned to the school credit accumulation and Regents’ goals as well as those focused on effective teacher planning and practice. Focused on the needs of struggling students, teachers receive professional 2018-19 CEP 14  development within their teams that aligns with student assessment data and the implementation of specific strategies aimed at increasing student learning. Instructional lead teachers facilitate inquiry team meetings and professional development. During department team meetings, members share responsibility for the protocol process of looking at student work by rotating roles of facilitator, documenter, and presenter. Teachers commented that their practice has shifted as a result of both inquiry and department team work. One teacher mentioned how adopting the Power Point layout used by his department colleagues, coupled with the use of Depth of Knowledge leveled questioning learned during team professional development, led to an increase of 42% in student performance on the concept of the converse, inverse, and contra-positive of a conditional statement. Another teacher shared that the suggestion of focusing on key word knowledge during a department team meeting led to an increase of 50% in student performance following conceptual re-teaching based on interim assessment data. Teachers mentioned the adoption of guided notes as a strategy to support student learning shared during inquiry and department meetings has led to increased student engagement and the completion of assignments across the school. One teacher specified that using guided notes led to an increase in daily student work completion and retention of information as observed by student oral responses and in written assessment across classes. What the school needs to improve and Key Area of Focus Continue to refine curricula to include a range of rigorous tasks so that all students demonstrate increasingly higher levels of thinking, questioning and cognitive engagement, thus ensuring college and career readiness. (1.1) ● The school has a system for developing, revising, and implementing curricula aligned to key State standards. By using the Atlas Rubicon online system for curriculum mapping and unit planning in unison with on-going professional development on curricular development and refinement provided by a leader in the field, the school has created a uniform, systematic approach to school-wide curriculum. Evidence of alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and instructional shifts was seen in sample curriculum maps and units. For example, the focus on domain specific vocabulary is present in maps and units of study across the school. The use of informational text and tasks asking for evidence to support claims is embedded in literacy content in English language arts, social studies, and science. Teachers plan and revise curricula using student data and feedback from peers and school leaders. Special attention to the needs of struggling students is the focus on strategy instruction implementation developed through inquiry team professional development sessions. While the school has consistently structured curriculum across the school that is systematically planned and revised using student data, rigorous habits and higher order skills that are differentiated for a range of learners from lowest to highest is not emphasized and embedded in all plans to the same level of depth and detail across the school. In reviewing maps and units, there were differences in the levels of articulated differentiation of instruction. In some, differentiation was generic while in others it was highly articulated by learning style and student grouping information. As a result, consistency in the depth and detail of rigorous and differentiated instruction focused on meeting the needs of all students across the school is uneven across curricula, thus limiting the school’s capacity to accelerate the closing of the achievement gap. Deepen common teaching practices focused on questioning, discussion challenging tasks for all students so that all students create work products that demonstrate mastery of State standards. (1.2) ● The school’s consistent use of the workshop model to structure daily instruction aligns with the school’s belief about how students learn best. This process uses direct and modeled instruction followed by guided practice for groups as well as individual students and leads to the gradual release of responsibility fostering independence and accountability for learning. As observed in written lesson plans and classrooms visited, teachers carefully plan and deliver instruction to support student learning. The use of consistent structures such as guided notes was seen across classrooms. Questioning along the range of Depth of Knowledge (DOK) was evident in plans and heard in classrooms observed. While teacher plans and classrooms observed evidenced the use of these consistent structures, teachers did not consistently capture, build upon and extend student thinking among students or build upon student questioning of other students during whole class discussion, shares and summaries. In some classrooms observed, teachers asked students questions at different points in the lesson; however, follow up questions about how they came to their answer, why they thought something was so were not asked, or the asking for clarification and explanation was not always prompted. One example was observed when a student asked a question and the teacher 2018-19 CEP 15  provided the answer and did not redirect it to the students in the class to consider and respond, thus allowing for deeper thinking, clarification, and probing follow-up questions by students. Limited opportunities for students to deeply and rigorously engage their thinking as well as critiquing and questioning the reasoning of their peers during whole class discussion does not allow for consistently high levels of thinking, participation, and ownership across all grades and content. 2018-19 CEP 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K528 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 197 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 9 9 4 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 83.8% % Reduced Lunch 13.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 17.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 54% 46% 54.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 53 53 86.5% 9.1% 18.3% 74.1% 4.6% 1.5% 0 7% 3.6 N/A N/A 66% 44% 68.3% 8% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Use of a systematic plan to provide teachers access to robust pedagogical support (i.e., inter-visitation, cross-grade conversations, exemplar curriculum models, access to expert CCLS curriculum writers, and CCLS conferences), materials, and training aligned to CCLS curricula and instructional shifts for individual and subgroups of students. ● Structure and protocols for analysis, plan to track progress over time on explicitly identified targets, creation of pre- and post-unit assessments and have a process for adapting curriculum that demonstrates improving individual and subgroup achievement. Priority needs: Based upon the schools internal review we need to increase the rigor of our curriculum to ensure students success. ● Collaborate consistently within grades and subjects to deliver interdisciplinary curricula that incorporate the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities, and there is evidence that teachers regularly develop innovative strategies for connecting these curricula with subject-specific curricula. Teachers monitor and adjust curricula to support the CCLS instructional shifts and NYS content standards and ensure higher-order thinking skills are consistently present by providing necessary supports and extensions for all groups of students across core content areas and grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During SY 2018-2019, as a result of implementation of WICOR/AVID teaching and learning strategies and New Visions curricula, we will meet our Safe Harbor AYP Targets in both ELA and Math. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Interim Assessments : Administer interim assessments every six weeks as a benchmark of student progress. Quantitative data from Interim assessments will be analyzed in content teams through an inquiry protocol. Administration will meet with teachers individually regarding interim results. Low Performing Students on Interim Assessment Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration and each department’s lead teachers Common Instructional Framework (CIF)/WICOR: Introduction to staff and students the CIF, which includes the following 6 components, Collaborative Group work, Questioning, Writing To Learn, Scaffolding, Questioning, Classroom Talk, and Literacy Groups, via staff monthly professional development and implementation during the first 21 days of CIF launching lessons in all Math, Science, ELA, and Social Studies classrooms, in order to establish teaching and learning habits with predictability and consistency across classrooms. The establishment of teaching and learning habits, fosters trust amongst teachers and students because of the predictability and consistency across classrooms. Vertical Alignement : During common planning time teachers work collaboratively on vertical alignment of our curriculum with a focus on writing. Skedula Training: All teachers are trained to use Skedula as an online gradebook. All students are taught in their AVID classes how to access their grades online and analyze their gradebook so they can keep track of their performance. Parents are sent information on how to access their child’s gradebook in order to support their child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers and students September 2018-June 2019 Principal and all teachers Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Master Teacher At-risk students and Tutors Sept. 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselor and AVID program coordinators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct 5 AVID College and Career Readiness family work shops throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● Students to provide peer tutoring ● Tutors from Medgar Evers ● Lead Teachers/Cabinet ● All Teachers ● Principal ● AVID Program Manager ● Carnegie Math Staff developer ● Teacher Development Coach Principal Assigned as ELA Coach Instructional Resources: ● Launching Lessons for first 21 days in Math, Science, ELA, Social Studies ● AVID Library (Includes family workshops, cornell note taking training CD, strategy books in ELA, Social Studies, Math, Science) ● SIOP Books ● Instructional Rounds Protocol ● Lesson Study Protocol ● WICOR Posters ● Datacation/Skedula/IO Education ● Driven by Data Books ● Regents Prep Books ● Teachboost New Visions Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 20  Scheduling: ● Scheduling common planning time for all teachers by department and grade ● Coverages for teachers to observe each other ● Professional Development Implementation and Planning time Monthly for 3hrs on First Monday’s Bi monthly AVID meetings: 5 teachers twice a month for 2 hours, 1 guidance counselor and 2 administrator twice a month during periods 2-5 Job-embedded support for teachers Personalized PD for teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Interim Analysis meetings every six weeks (One week for data analysis) to check mastery of instructional objectives ● Progress Reports/Grades every three weeks in Fall Semester to look at percentage of 10 th grade students on track to pass course, at-risk, and failing course ● Learning Walks once a month to check for effectiveness of lesson studies and instructional rounds as it relates to our Common Instructional Framework, Instructional Focus, target groups, and WICOR strategies ● Teachboost will be monitored monthly for teacher growth in component 3b Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based upon the schools internal review we need to: ● The school leader, together with staff, establishes a system that allows each student to be known by a designated adult and positively reinforces academic success for all students. ● The school leader ensures that all staff knows and uses research-based programs and practices for referral and support for all students that address social and emotional developmental health and academic success. ● The school leader ensures that all staff members use data to identify areas of need and leverages internal resources to promote student social and emotional developmental health. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In collaboration with the staff, teachers, students, guidance counselor and Dean’s office, during SY 2018-19 students will increase their view of how adults at HSGC support their social, emotional and developmental health by 5% evidenced on the engagement portion of the NYC Environmental Survey 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Promotion of students to a less restrictive environment will be increased by a close monitoring of all social, emotional and academic goals by all related service support staff. As evident by student attendance, IEPs, and teacher recommendations on an ongoing basis and at each annual review. Students and Parents/ Guardians 9/1/18- Administration 6/30/19 SIT Team ISS Coordinator Implementation of a school wide model for transitional planning and academic planning monitored by the SIT team and instructional support services will ensure that the social, emotional and developmental needs of all students will be achieved. This will be implemented by June 2019 and reviewed on a bi-weekly basis by SIT team, the student, and the students’ parent/guardian. Engage in collaborative partnerships between SIT team, pupil personnel staff, instructional support services staff, instructional staff and administration in order to develop and implement successful strategies to support students’ social, emotional and developmental growth as evident by increased participation in ongoing weekly pupil personnel team and bi-weekly SIT team meetings. Promote an environment that nurtures an active and vibrant partnership to engage students, parents/guardians, teachers, support staff and the parent coordinator in activities that ensure that the school community at large has a vested interest in students’ social, emotional and developmental growth as evident by increased attendance at PA meetings, NYC Learning Environment Survey and increased participation in school wide activities. Student achievement will be celebrated through awards ceremonies. Students 9/1/18- Administration 6/30/19 SIT Team SIT Team 9/1/18- Administration PPT Team 6/30/19 ISS Staff Instructional Staff Administration Students 9/1/18- CBOs 6/30/19 Local Colleges/ Entire school community Parents/ Guardians Universities Administration Local middle schools 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct 5 AVID College and Career Readiness Family Work shops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common planning time for SIT team members ● Common planning time for PPT members ● Availability for per-session funds to facilitate after school outreach projects/efforts Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP Title I TA 21st Century Grant X SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A mid-year survey will be administered to assess progress towards meeting goals at the beginning of the spring semester, 2/1/18. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon the schools internal review we need to: ● Teachers use instructional practices and strategies organized around annual, unit and daily lesson plans to meet established student goals and promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry ● Teachers use a variety of data sources including screening, interim measures and progress monitoring to inform lesson planning, develop explicit teacher plans and foster student participation in their own learning process. Teachers vertically align curricula to ensure college and career readiness, especially as it pertains to writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Focused professional development on AVID WICOR Strategies and vertical alignment of curricula will increase our passing rate of our level 1, ENL, SWD students by 5% for the 2018-19 SY. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? AVID Team Meetings— The AVID team meets monthly to discuss utilization of AVID strategies and overall AVID implementation, to ensure college readiness for AVID Elective students and improved academic performance for all students. The Lesson Tuning protocol is used to ensure the intentional embedding of WICOR strategies in lesson plans. The AVID meetings help to foster trust and collaboration amongst the 10 th grade AVID team. 10th Grade Teachers, , Guidance Counselor, AVID Parents Sept June Teachers, Administration, Guidance Counselor Parent Involvement: We will host 5 AVID Parent Workshops in order to familiarize parents with AVID and our expectations of AVID students, so that they can collaborate with the AVID team and be of support to their child and our initiative. This will also help to cultivate trust and a sense of inclusion amongst students, parents, faculty, and staff. Instructional Rounds-- teachers build basic skills, improve high school instruction through instructional rounds focused on our CIF, increase graduation rates, increase college entry, and provide crucial supports to help college students and job trainees advance toward credentials with high labor market value. Instructional rounds help to foster a sense of trust and collaboration amongst teachers. vertical Alignment : During common planning time teachers will engage in vertical alignment work with a focus on writing. School ReDesign Coaching-- teachers develop their leadership skills to support collaborative learning and practice with colleagues; they will deepen their understanding of the Common Core standards, the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and other aspects of the citywide instructional expectations . Furthermore, the skills and knowledge acquired through the 11 sessions help to cultivation collaboration and trust amongst teacher teams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers Sept June Teachers, Teacher Leaders All Teachers Sept -June Teachers, Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders Sept -June Office of Leadership, Teacher Leaders, Administration 2018-19 CEP 26  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will conduct 5 AVID College and Career Readiness Family Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding from School Time Lab will cover the redesign coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Lesson Studies ● Instructional Rounds ● Self-Studies ● Instructional Walkthroughs ● Scholarship Data Increase in the passing rate of level 1s, SWDs and ENL population by 3% by end of the first semester, Feb 1, 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: ● Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems to examine and improve individual and school-wide practices in the critical areas (student achievement, curriculum & teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health) that make progress toward mission-critical goals. ● Leaders make strategic decisions to organize resources concerning human, programmatic and fiscal capital so that school improvement and student goals are achieved. ● The school leader has a fully functional system in place to conduct targeted and frequent observations; track progress of teacher practices based on student data, feedback and professional development opportunities; and hold administrators and staff accountable for continuous improvement. Priority Needs: The SMART goals/mission and long-term vision are created and supported by staff, families, and students and are uniformly seen, heard, and known across the entire school community and affiliated partnerships. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Shared sense of urgency about achieving school-wide goals aligned with the vision as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will result in a 10% increase in the credit accumulation of the 11 th grade students for 2018-19 SY. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Introduce the Common Instructional Framework and AVID WICOR Strategies, in order to create consistency of best instructional practices across classrooms Implementation of Vertical Alignment in order to continuously refine curriculum. Implementation of Instructional Rounds in order to collaboratively continuously refine curriculum through feedback and reflection. Instructional rounds help to foster trust amongst teachers. Teachers Sept 2-June 30 Principal and Teacher Leaders Teachers Teachers Sept 2-June 30 Principal and Teacher Leaders Sept 2-June 30 Principal and Teacher Leaders Frequent Informal Observations using the Danielson Framework Teachers Sept 2-June 30 Principal and Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will facilitate 5 AVID College and Career Readiness Workshops for Families Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development after school for Teachers for 3 hours on CIF components, coverage for teachers to conduct lesson studies, instructional rounds, shadow a student for a day, and to plan to ensure consistency. Professional Development and Coaching for Principal through Shane Purse and Associates and the School Leadership Network. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholarship data and Regents data will be reviewed at the start of February 2019 to determine teacher impact on student outcomes, and specifically to ensure all 11th graders are on track to graduate . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship report to analyze credit accumulation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● The school leader makes it a school-wide priority for all students and their families to be aware of the school-wide expectations and plan pertaining to graduating from the school and provides age appropriate information about college and postsecondary CTE programs to students and their families. ● The school staff uses a plan to communicate with parents (i.e., text-messaging, and communicating in a variety of ways) concerning student progress, achievement, and needs. ● School leaders, data specialists, student support professionals, program coordinators, and community agencies share data and integrate data systems in order to identify family needs and target appropriate support strategies. ● The entire school community ensures that student data is shared in a way that families can understand a child’s learning needs and successes, proactively advocate for their children, and partner with the school to provide appropriate student support. Priority Needs: Based upon the schools internal review we need to: The school provides professional development to school staff on how to actively seek and sustain partnerships with families and community organizations linked to the school’s plan for engaging parents to support student success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Increased school communication to all school constituents will increase the number of students attending the school’s AIS by 3% for 2018-19 SY 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development training to the staff on how to actively seek and sustain partnerships with families and community organizations that are linked to the school’s plan for engaging parents to support student success. Faculty and Staff Sept 2 - June 30 Provide information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. Parents Sept 2 - June 30 There will be a minimum of 5 professional development meetings for parents, which will begin in September through the end of June. The AVID team will host 5 AVID Parent Workshops in order to familiarize parents with AVID and our expectations of AVID students, so that they can be of support to their child and our initiative. This will also help to cultivate trust and a sense of inclusion amongst students, parents, faculty, and staff. Parents Sept 2 - Parents June 30 Sept 2 - June 30 Parent Coordinator, Family worker, Attendance Teacher, and Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator, Family worker, Attendance Teacher, and Guidance Counselor Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator, Family worker, Attendance Teacher, and Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators, teachers, support staff (i.e., Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Family worker, etc.), parents ● Coaching by S.W.A.G to support parent/family engagement and workshop delivery, funded by 21 st Century. Training on the Academic policy, CCLS, credit accumulation, Regents requirements, understanding the transcript, Skedula...and making it comprehensible for parents etc. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● 10% of parent population in attendance at 3rd workshop ● 3% of students attending AIS by Feb Mid-point progress monitoring will be done Feb 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data from AIS after school program and parent workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. Students who previously failed the NYS Regents exam 2. Students who are behind in credits 3. ESL students 4. Students with IEPs Mathematics 1. Students who previously failed the NYS Regents exam 2. Students who are behind in credits 3. Students with IEPs Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1.Compass Blended online learning 2. Student Projects Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) -1:1, Small Group, Tutoring, -Small group instructional strategies When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -Services are provided during the school day as well as after school, and on Saturday 3. Writing, Editing and Revision -Individualized learning goals 4. Small group instruction reinforcing and extending reading skills and strategies 5.Scholastic ID Vision Voice Curriculum 6 . Medgar Evers College Upward Bound 7. AVID Tutorials 1.Peer-Tutoring: Cross grade tutoring with higher grade students tutoring lower grade students 2. Medgar Evers College Upward Bound 3. AVID Tutorials -1:1, Small Group, Tutoring, -Small group instructional strategies - Services are provided during the school day as well as after school, and on Saturday -Individualized learning goals 2018-19 CEP 34 -1:1, Small Group, Tutoring, Small group instructional strategies -Services are provided during the school day as well as after school, and on Saturday - Individualized learning goals -1:1, Small Group, Tutoring, -Small group instructional strategies -Services are provided during the school day as well as after school, and on Saturday -Individualized learning goals -Services are provided during the school day as well as after school, and/or on Saturday -One-on-one or group counseling -Attendance review and group discussion during attendance and grade teams meetings Science Social Studies 1. Students who previously failed the NYS Regents exam 2. Students who are behind in credits 3. Students with IEPs 1. Students who previously failed the NYS Regents exam 2. Students who are behind in credits 3. Students with IEPs At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -Students with poor attendance -Students in temporary housing -Students with social and emotional behavior concerns 4. Compass Blended online learning 1. Kaplan Advantage 2. Medgar Evers College Upward Bound 3. AVID Tutorials 4. Compass Blended online learning 1. Kaplan Advantage 2. Medgar Evers College Upward Bound 3. AVID Tutorials 4. Compass Blended online learning -The guidance counselor meets with students and parents of at-risk students regularly. -Guidance counselor provides mandated related services counseling. -Guidance counselor meets on a weekly basis with administrators, teachers, and other support staff to review attendance and other pertinent educational data of at-risk students. -School based support team social worker provides counseling during school time, meets with parents, 2018-19 CEP 35  develops and implements IEP’s goals for counseling services 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 31 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are planning to purchase school supplies and uniforms, and help with additional needs as they arise Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37 We are planning to purchase school supplies and uniforms, and help with additional needs as they arise 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Hiring Committee ● Hiring Fairs, College Teaching Programs, TFA, Open Market resumes, etc. ● Interviewed Questions to that reflect an understanding of teacher best practices (DF, CCLS, meeting the needs of all students, belief in how students learn best, assessment practices, etc.) ● Mentoring to support new teachers, New Teacher Induction Committee ● Lead teachers, Department Heads ● Intervisitations ● Professional development, teacher teams, department meetings ● External PD opportunities ● Accelerated courses and programs ● Support in teacher to administration certification Partnership with LIU School of Education, site for pre-service practicum and student teaching 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Common planning time: Unit Plans – Performance Tasks and Rubrics ● Partners for CCLS coaching, support, and training 2018-19 CEP 39  ● Network PD for CCLS-aligned instruction ● Alignment to DF and best practices and strategies ● Modifications for SPED/ELLS and use of Paraprofessionals to support students ● Specific school and/or instructional Goals and/or Objectives related to CCLS and skills ● Ongoing monitoring and support to provide teacher and paraprofessionals feedback on their practice and its alignment to the CCLS ● Lesson and unit planning that encourages CCLS best practices and strategies, monitoring the progress, and review of student work to revise the process as needed ● Ongoing revision of curriculum for alignment to CCLS and student achievement ● Continuous review of student work related to CCLS to modify practice and meet needs of all students Teacher feedback on PD and its effectiveness in the classroom – to revisit needed areas or revisions Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 CEP 40  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teacher teams review the effectiveness of school-wide and or common assessments. ● Different assessment strategies are compared so as to determine the most effective strategies and how they can be best modified and/or adapted for school-wide use ● Teachers and teacher teams help design rubrics that effectively assess students and modify and revise based on feedback ● Teacher teams also help create, align, and modify school grading policies ● PD always includes a reflection piece so that all voices are heard in terms of the assessment practices and the needed PD. The MOSL committee meets to make assessment decisions 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) p.19, p.25, p.27 N/A N/A N/A p.19,p.22,p.25,27,p.30 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 155,679 0 0 0 1,327,549 X N/A N/A N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 2018-19 CEP 41  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 CEP 42   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K528, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The High School for Global Citizenship will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 CEP 45  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Culture Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The High School for Global Citizenship , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The High School for Global Citizenship will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP 47  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K528, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, 2018-19 CEP 48  agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP 49  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 50  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 16 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP 51  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name The High School for Global Citizenship Borough Brooklyn School Number 528 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michelle Rochon Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Riu Xue Wang Teacher/Subject Area Kalliopi Litos/Data Specialist Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Callender Related-Service Provider Princess Francois Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Kabeya Mbuyi Coach N/A School Counselor Jeannine Texidor-Manning Parent Rose Laure Senatus Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Joanne Benoit Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 234 Total number of ELLs 36 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.38% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The High School for Global Citizenship administers the NYSITELL to incoming students, who are new to the New York City School system, and for students, who are identified as ENL, we look at the previous NYSESLAT, NYSITELL or LAB-R scores to ensure proper placement. According to our spring 2015 NYSESLAT scores the lowest section was writing followed by Speaking. Writing across the curriculum has been implements across all content areas to help address writing for all students. HSGC uses in-house Math, Science and ELA assessments data to determine students' needs. Based on the assessments and prior education, all ELL students are placed in an appropriate, rigorous high school program with additional support through afternoon tutoring. NLA support is offered during the last period in Arabic. All ELLs are encouraged to attend our After School Program. ELLs have been programmed for homework help in all subject areas in the after-school program. Also, ELLs are 2018-19 CEP 54  enrolled in elective classes such as AVID, College Summit, PSAT prep, Game Design, Animation, and Robotics. The program is being utilized during the school hours and in the after school program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our schools programs for ELLs by measuring their achievements through school skill - based created assessments, Common Core related units and assessments, Regents, NYSESLAT, SAT and PSAT results, and AVID data. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 17K528 is a high school. Therefore, we do not use the Response to Intervention framework. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the 2015 NYSESLAT modality breakdown data, our ENLs students are as follows: 40% of the students, listening and reading are the strongest modality vs. 60%, speaking and writing is the weakest modality. Similar results are found for ELL students at the intermediate level, where reading and writing are the weakest modalities. At the advanced level, the strongest modality is listening, followed by speaking and then reading. The weakest modality is writing. According to the RLAT report the breakdown of our ENL are as follows: 13.88% are expanding 27.77% are transitioning 33.33% are emerging 25% are entering 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Free Standing ESL Program offers ESL, ELA with ELA, ESL Content Subject Areas and Native Language Arts. ESL Content Subject Area classes have mixed profiency levels according the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test. ENL students are placed in ESL classes according to their NYSESLAT level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Free standing ENL instruction focuses on the four basic-language acquisition skills: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. ENL Instruction is provided by ENL classes as determined by English language proficiency levels and regulated by New York State CR Part 154 guidelines. ENL and ELA instructional strategies and methodologies are employed to teach Language Arts and Content areas which allow students to learn content and receive content credit while simultaneously developing English language skills and meeting or exceeding New York State and City standards. English Language Learners receive the New York State-mandated ENL/ELA allotted instruction time based on student proficiency level. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the content area teachers on Literacy and content area instruction. The reduced ratio of teacher to students allows for small group and individualized instruction. Through guided instruction, strategy lessons, interactive experiences, and individualized instruction, the students are led to interact in, reflect, read, write, problem solve, develop and practice strategies in the second language. Students scoring on a Beginner level on the NYSESLAT are programmed for a triple period of ESL, 2 periods of ESL and 1 period of push-in totaling a total of 750 minutes of ESL instruction. Students scoring on an Intermediate level receive 2 periods of push-in ESL or 1 period of free standing ESL and 1 push-in class, a minimum of 360 minutes a week. The advanced ELL students receive 1 period of ESL push-in instruction in one of their content areas or 1 free standing ESL, a minimum of 180 minutes per week. English Language Arts curriculum is designed to development student interest in literature, as well as their ability to understand and analyze a multitude of texts. To achieve this goal, students will read numerous pieces of literature, in multiple genres such as non-fiction, poetry, drama, and contemporary young adult fiction. Students will learn strategies to independently evaluate and respond to text. Critical thinking skills will be fostered as students engage in meaningful, student-driven discussions, participate in Socratic seminars, and complete a number of independent and collaborative projects. Mathematics courses are designed to create a math environment to problem solve, think critically, master numerical concepts, Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, and AP Statistics and Probability. Students will be afforded the opportunity to utilize manipulatives to construct, comprehend and analyze mathematical theory. They will also learn to verbalize, justify and present their arithmetic cognition, through journal writing and Socratic Seminars. The science courses are designed to make sure that all students including ENLs achieve mastery in the sciences. Curricula material is delivered using a combination of classwork and laboratory course work. To support and encourage the ENL student, reading and writing scaffolding techniques are used. The teachers also ensure student achievement with the use of active learning strategies, hands on experimentation, group work and discussions. Students are encouraged to use their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills to demonstrate their comprehension of the material being taught in class. The Social Studies courses are created to assist students as they explore the history of the United States as well as the world. To ensure that they internalize concepts such as: US expansion, imperialism, industry growth and government policies ELL students will participate in activities such as role plays, timelines, writing and the creation of scripts, all of which are designed to enable them to fully grasp the concept of life at different times in history. Students will also read books which have taken place during specific time periods, and which will help them further understand the time period they are studying. Socratic Seminars will facilitate higher order thinking skills, while allowing the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing. In order to provide content and native language support to ENL students the ESL teacher pushes into the ELA and Writing classes. During this push in program, the teacher works with students individually or in groups to help scaffold activities and provide strategies that help students strengthen reading, writing and listening skills. 2018-19 CEP 56  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. HSGC has high expectations for ELL student achievement, and the goal is to have all ELL students pass the NYSESLAT, all five Regents examinations, and attend a college/university post-graduation. Instruction in all content areas is rigorous, strategies across all content areas include essay revision checklist, rubrics for every writing assignment, use scaffolding strategies for providing English language learners with support to enable them to successfully complete tasks requiring academic language proficiency by modifying language without simplification, modifying vocabulary, speed, stress and intonation, use activate students' prior knowledge, use the primary language to facilitate learning, contextualize language, use media, technology resources, and other visual supports, use formative and summative assessment and how to re-teach accordingly, and provide explicit instruction in content-specific skills, and embedding language in an understandable context. HSGC focuses on writing, and the ELLs, former ELLs and SIFE students are provided with a writing course and an opportunity to attend after-school tutoring and enriched after-school ESL classes. ESL instruction is delivered in English, with a focus on vocabulary, writing, speaking, memorizing, and listening. ESL instructional methods are used to foster language development include modeling, creating an interactive classroom where ELL student are encouraged to speak and listen to one another, speaking clearly and slowly, use of vocabulary, word walls, learning to read graphs and maps, have pictures, etc. Our ESL teacher collaborates with the content area teachers to provide ESL strategies and methodologies in their lesson plan and curriculum, which is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards, and to strengthen language development for the ELL students. Students are exposed to all required subject areas based on the programs for grades 9, 10, 11, and 12. Students take Regents exams in grades 9, 10, 11 and 12. All classes are aligned with the New York standards and tailored to help ELL’s succeed in the Math and Living Environment Regents Exam. The prevailing methodology is the Common Core approach. Cooperative Learning, the workshop model, audio-lingual, and Principles of Learning are incorporated in daily instruction and student work in groups with the assistance of a paraprofessional. Many supplementary teaching aides are used such as visual books, workbooks and tapes. To help students acquire and develop English language skills, teachers engage them in role-playing, dialogs and trips which encourage students to communicate. They participate in classroom discussion and activities. Alternate strategies are used in the classroom such as mapping, semantics webs, word walls, diagrams and back stepping, all geared towards Principals of Learning communicating and improving language skills. In addition, students are encouraged to attend our After School Program. ELLs have been programmed for the homework help in all subject areas in the after-school program. Also, ELLs are enrolled in elective classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are not evaluated in their home language. Newly arrived students with limited English are administered the NYSITELL. If the students are ENLs then they take the NYSESLAT in the spring. ELL students are given extended time during formal and informal examinations, and they have an option of testing in in their native language on State assessments. Bilingual staff and/or translation services are available to assess students, as needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. The SIFE students are provided with small group instruction by the ENL teacher pushing-in to the core classes. Guidance counselors also provide social emotional support to the SIFE students. ENL instruction is differentiated for SIFE students through the use of audio books, phonics, guided reading, level based reading materials, using sentence strips, assign daily journal writing, plan role play activities, use interview and questionnaires, have student present information with visual illustrations, etc. 6b. Instruction for ENLs who are new to the US schools, less than three years, will focus on vocabulary development, phonics, technology programs that convert text in the native language, role playing, audio-visual, hand-on demonstrations. 2018-19 CEP 57  6c. Developing ENLs with 4-6 years of ENL services will continue to meet demands of the core subject classes and be able to pass their classes and Regents examination. They are programmed for two push-in ESL classes, teaching content specific vocabulary, academic language, pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary, following directions, listening, making a brief presentation in class. 6d. Long-term ENLs will continue to receive social-emotional support, ESL teacher and academic teachers will continue to differentiate instruction, have student attend higher level classes, such as AP and SAT classes. 6e. All former ENLs in years 1 and 2 continue to receive ENL testing modifications as per NYS regulations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL-SWDs are served as per their IEP, ESL/ELA teachers collaborate and ensure the students languaegle learning needs are being met. Instruction will be differentiated. We use content based instruction, scaffolding of academic language , one -to -one support, small group instruction in order to provide ENL-SWDs the support they need. ENL students use glossaries and translated dictionaies. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ESL teacher, Special Education teacher, and content area teacher work together to ensure that the ELL-SWD are achieving their IEP goals, by following the IEP recommnedations. Our ELLs, ELL-SWD, and SIFE students are placed in regular education classes, with push-in services in the core classes, with the exception of the Beginner and Intermediate ELL students who receive a double period of ESL instruction (beginner) and a single period of ESL instruction (intermediate). We ensure that appropriate testing accommodations, time extensions, separate location, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries is provided to the ELL-SWD student. Our teachers target instruction to focus on students' IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. English Language Learners are programmed for our academic intervention services (AID), which are aligned with the New York State Standards and are congruent with those of the regular classroom. In addition, student support services are also provided as needed in order to address barriers to improved academic success. Students that are at-risk of not meeting the State Standards in ELA, mathematics, social studies, and science are mandated to attend an after-school program that offers additional support in order to bridge the gap in achieving the NY State Standards. The ELL students and parents are notified of the intervention programs and strategies we have in place and encourage our ELL students to participate in the after-school programs. Intervention strategies to help our ELLs include small group instruction, individual instruction, push-in ESL services in the core classes. ELL students use glossaries, bilingual dictionaries to help them master the content in the specific academic class. Every six weeks the teachers and ESL teacher administer the Interim Assessments to determine the growth and mastery of the content area. The data is shared with the students and parents via mail and a phone call. Translators are available should a parent request to speak to the teacher in their native language. General education classroom teachers in addition to the ESL teachers provide extensive literacy lessons differentiated by needs that expose children to the actual structure of the second language. Lessons take into consideration and build upon the ELLs background knowledge and expand their English vocabulary. Opportunity for discussions is frequent and elaborate responses are encouraged. Students are monitored on an on-going basis and instruction is modified based on academic need. The reading and writing workshop model promotes second language development through natural and explicit exposure to reading and writing that is meaningful, standards-based and is modified for the ELL students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are not considering any new programs for this year. We are looking at ReadingPlus and the collections series. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any services or programs at this time. 2018-19 CEP 58  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, including ELLs and former ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs, by attending after-school tutoring, taking advanced placement classes, registering for College Now classes, SAT Prep classes, etc. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs including elective classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ESL teacher provides glossaries, word-to-word dictionaries in the ENLs native language, use of classroom library, and technology software, such as APEX and internet oriented programs, to assist students in accelerating their language acquisition process. The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Books on tape and leveled books from Pearson in Science and Social Studies support ELLs with improving their listening, comprehension and reading skills in content area subjects. All classrooms have LCD projectors and technology is incorporated into each lesson. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? An Arabic native-language course if offered to our Arabic speaking students, with ICO Learn Arabic textbooks and workbooks. In addition, in addition we provide ancillary support with native speaking staff members (i.e. French, Haitian-Creole, and Spanish). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENLs are placed according to their grade level and English proficiency level. Our ESL program offer content area instruction that is both age and grade appropriate. Students who are older and/or in a higher grade and have limited English proficiency are provided with extra ESL instruction, and after-school tutoring that helps prepare them to pass all Regents exams and graduate in a timely manner. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ESL teacher provides glossaries, word-to-word dictionaries in the ENLs native language, use of classroom library, and technology software, such as APEX and internet oriented programs, to assist students in accelerating their language acquisition process. The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs: Books on tape and leveled books from Pearson in Science and Social Studies support ELLs with improving their listening, comprehension and reading skills in content area subjects. All classrooms have LCD projectors and technology is incorporated into each lesson. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs receive one-on-one counseling, peer buddy-up, after-school tutoring, and technology software programs. All students, including newly enrolled ELLs, are invited to attend an open house prior to the beginning of the school year. Newly enrolled ELLs meet with the Principal, Assistant Principal and/or Guidance Counselor to assist with a smooth transition to our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and Arabic are the foreign language elective that is offered to our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 59  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ELL Teacher, Special Education Teachers, and Lead Teachers provide staff development and one-on-one professional development sessions to develop and align their curriculum and lesson plans with Common Core Learning Standards and best practice of the Danielson Framework, the New Teaching Standards, Differentiating Instruction and Goal Setting, Instructional rounds and grade-level teams around supporting the ESL population at HSGC. In addition, we provide lesson studies in Departmental Meeting to scaffold curriculum for the ELL population. The HSGC staff participate in professional development with the NYC Writing Project that provides whole-groups and individual support for teachers with the emphasis on writing for ELLs and ELL-SWD. Teachers are provided training and instructional materials to support ENL students using the Advancement via Individual Determination (AVID) model. Shane Purse Consultants (SPC) proves support ESL and content area teachers in curriculum development and instructional strategies with a focus on ELLs. SPC provides professional development around Social Studies and Math content, and provides individual consultation with teachers. The Speech Therapists is at HSGC 2x per week and provides mandated services to ELL students who are required to receive such services. The therapist, when in attendance, participates in all ELL professional development conducted on the school grounds. The ELL team turnkey all professional development conducted by central to the entire school community. The school does not utilize the services of Occupational and Physical therapists. The administrative support staff {secretary, family worker, and school aides} receives ongoing professional development with regards to interaction with ELL parents and students. The Shane-Purse Consultant provides to the school community professional training for Special Education teachers on working with the ESL population. The workshops provided by the Shane-Purse Consultant. All HSGC teachers and support staff attend monthly professional development meetings through the NYC Writing Project, Shane Purse Consultants, bi-monthly AVID meetings, teachers meet 3 times a week during department meetings professional with the focus on Curriculum and Lesson Plan Design, with an emphasis on vocabulary development and Critical Reading Skills for the ELLs, former ELLs, and SIFE students. The LEAD teachers schedule inter-visitations in the classroom, and meet with the teachers to discuss the lesson plan observed. In addition, the ESL teacher attends weekly meetings with the academic teachers, during Common Planning Time and Grade team Meetings to address the ELL strategies with the focus on components 3C: Engaging Student Learning, 2B: Establishing a Culture for Learning and 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction for ELL students, including the SIFE students. The professional development provide by the Shane-Purse Consultants focuses on engaging ELL teachers and other staff members that interact with the ESL students in the Common Core Learning Standards. This is done in whole groups and individual sessions. In addition the administrative staff internally provides in house professional development with regards to best practices around the common core learning standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All core teachers and the ESL teacher have attended outside professional development offered by the Office of English Language Learners, PD offered by the DOE, and the Network. Our Mathematics teachers began their six session series on CCLS Mathematics Institute for Secondary Teachers of ELLs. Our ESL teacher attends on-going professional development related to the NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL. The Triad Consultant Firm provide our staff support with regards to assisting ELLs as they transition from middle to high school. The guidance office and its personnel, with various professional development training, support the transition of our ELLs student. The Shane-Purse Firm has focused on training to meet the social, emotional needs 2018-19 CEP 60  of our ELL students. The training for the 7.5 hours will focus on how to increase language acquisition for the ELLs, and increase academic achievement. Instructional strategies that all academic and ESL teacher will use are scaffolding, integration of language and literacy in all academic content. Teachers will engage students in hands-on learning by creating picture dictionaries, flash cards, teaching a mini-lesson create a rich environment where students are motivated to learn by having word walls, classroom expectations, rubrics. Teachers will build on literacy instruction in order to master proficiency in English by having a pre and post reading strategies, use graphic organizers, reading logs, and journal writing. Teachers will looking at data and develop lessons based on the ELLs proficiency level Professional development is achieved through the combined efforts of experienced content specific and licensed personnel that include: Team teachers, assistant principal, self-contained ESL teachers and the ESL support specialist. The professional development goal for the 2015-2016 school year is two-fold. First, pertinent personnel will work with the staff to analyze and disaggregate data for all ELL’s. Secondly, teachers will utilize the information from the disaggregated data to plan small group instruction, group students by area of need and individualize instruction. Teachers will continue to meet to plan curriculum units of study, gather and share resources and materials with the grade facilitators and ESL teachers. ESL teachers will work together and articulate with the general education teachers, on student goals and progress. Inter-visitations and debriefing sessions will continue to provide the staff with ESL methodologies and best practices. The ESL support specialists will attend workshops provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support and turnkey information at grade meetings. Study groups will be provided to all of our teachers on supporting our ELLs in reading and writing as well as planning for small group work in order to scaffold language development. In addition, various lunch and learn workshops will be offered to all ESL and content area teachers as well as administrators and paraprofessionals. The focus of these sessions will be to examine the Common Core aligned units of study in reading and writing, develop appropriate mini-lessons and utilize all the components of the Balanced Literacy (read aloud, shared reading, shared writing, and interactive writing) to scaffold the curriculum. In addition, we will use these sessions to provide 7.5 hours of ESL training to all teachers who work with English Language Learners and 10 hours of ESL training to all teachers who work with Special Education English Language Learners. Additionally, ESL and content teachers, coaches, administrators, and school secretaries participate in Professional Development offered by our network Achievement Coach and network ELA and Math Study Groups. Records are maintained in both the main and guidance office at the High School for Global Citizenship. In addition Ms. Francois our professional development coordinator keeps various records {i.e. agendas, attendance sheets, and handouts}. The minutes and other items from departmental training are held by each department coordinator. The assistant principal maintains records pertaining to AVID and lesson study training and professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? HSGC conducts 3-4 ELL parent orientation throughout the year by the administration, teachers, and ESL teacher . Parents of ELLs, former ELLs and SIFE students are invited to attend the freshman orientation, where they receive a copy of the student handbook, discipline and safety (in their native language), academic expectations, new graduation requirements, requirements for all programs in our school, including the Advanced Placement classes, College Summit, and ESL classes. If parents are not able to attend the orientation, they have another opportunity to meet the HSGC staff the 3rd week of school at Family Curriculum Night. At the meeting, parents and parents of ELLs receive Pupil Path access (in their native language), where they can view their child’s academic progress, daily attendance, homework, classwork, and be able to correspond with their child’s teachers. Pupil Path is able to convert the information in the parents’ native language. If a parent is not able to attend either meeting, the material is mailed to the home. Our Peer Leaders and students are present at the meetings and assist the parents, by serving as translators or directing the families to the appropriate people based on their concern and needs. We have teachers and staff who are able to communicate with the families in their native language. Communication with ELL parents are in their home language and all material are translated in the parents’ home language. If there is not a staff 2018-19 CEP 61  member or translator available, the school utilized the Translation and Interpretation Unit, where over-the-phone interpreters are available to assist the ELL parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. To strengthen the connection and support of the parents/guardians of our ELL and former ELL students, our school actively involves parents in planning and decision-making in support of their child’s education. Parents are encouraged to participate on the School Leadership Team and Parent Association Meetings. Parent issues and concerns are addressed and shared at the PA and SLT meetings, and are shared via e-mail with the HSGC staff. Phone calls, mailings, text and e-mails are sent to the parents' homes both in English and their native language. Parents receive daily phone calls from the support staff, through their child’s teachers, and monthly mailings are sent to the homes in their native language. Topics discussed at PA meetings are disseminated to parents via e-mail, mail, and Pupil Path in their home language. The role of our parent coordinator with regards to our ELL parents is to facilitate parental involvement in the school community. The PC provides access to translation services and provides opportunities to engage in activities with the Parent Academy at Medgar Evers College. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 62 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michelle Rochon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 63  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The HS for Global Citizenship School DBN: 17K528 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michelle Rochon Title Principal Kabeya Mbuyi Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rose Laure Senatus Parent Jennifer Callender Teacher/Subject Area Princess Francois Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jeannine Texidor-Manning School Counselor Michael Prayor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 64  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K528 School Name: The H.S. for Global Citizenship Superintendent: Clarence Ellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Brown Teacher Yes Yes (*Primary) Beth * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The High School for Global Citizenship (HSGC) gathers data through ATS system and the Home Language Surveys to determine the written translation and oral interpretation of our parents. The emergency blue cards are cross references with the Home Language Survey to ensure accuracy in the data collected. ENL Parent/Student Langauge by Grade Grade Arabic Haitian-Creole French Fulani Spanish 9 33% 33% 0 0 33% 10 42.86% 14% 14% 14% 14% 2018-19 CEP 65  11 28.57% 42.86% 14.29% 0 14.29% 12 0 55.56% 0 11.11% 33.33% 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Parents preferred language for both written and oral communication include Arabic (25%), French (8.33%), Fulani (5.55%), Haitian-Creole (38.88%), and Spanish (22%). Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic (25%), French (8.33%), Fulani (5.55%), Haitian-Creole (38.88%), and Spanish (22%). Arabic (25%), French (8.33%), Fulani (5.55%), Haitian-Creole (38.88%), and Spanish (22%). Written Preferred Percent Written Arabic (25%), French (8.33%), Fulani (5.55%), Haitian-Creole (38.88%), and Spanish (22%). Arabic (25%), French (8.33%), Fulani (5.55%), Haitian-Creole (38.88%), and Spanish (22%). 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 66  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families In the beginning of the school year we mail out Welcome Back letters, Back-to-School Night letters, Pupil Path invitations, report card/progress report in families native language, military-opt out letters, letters from the Chancellor, notices, Regents invitations, school events, parent/teacher conferences, academic progress, and academic intervention letters. During Parent-Teacher Conferences bilingual staff is paired up with teachers who can help translate student's academic progess. 9/2017, 11/2017, 3/2018 translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Utilizing available staff and students 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Back-To-School Night, Curriculum Night, FASFA Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, Career Day, Academic Intervention meetings with supoprt staff, including the guidance counselor, attendance teacher, family worker, teachers, assistant principal, and principal. 9/2017, 11/2017, 3/2018 Back to school night 9/2017 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Utilizing available staff and students Utilizing available staff and students 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Translation services in many forms where needed 2018-19 CEP 67  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Review and brainstorming Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signs are posted by the main office, guidance office, and dean's office indicating that translation and interpretation services are available in the school for parents whose primary language is not English, especially for Spanish and French/Haitian-Creole speaking parents. Documents regarding parent rights in relationship to translation and interpretation services will be available and distributed during incoming student orientation and parent-teacher conferences. Additionally, parents are provided with school documents, such as report cards, transcripts, and letters in their home language. An interpretor will be available for parents/guardians safety and discipline matters, academic, health, and any Special Education and/or English Language Learners academic program. All notification documents can be found at the Translation and INterpretation Unit's intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Reviewing the Parent Surveys and making necessary adjustments based on the findings, and monthly meetings with the Parent Association members and SLT. 2018-19 CEP 68 
