2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K537 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR YOUTH AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AT ERASMUS Principal: MARY PRENDERGAST 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information HS for Youth and Community Development 331700011537 9-12 School Number (DBN): 17K537 911 Flatbush Avenue Brooklyn NY 11216 Room 3W52 718 564-2470 Phone Number: 718 564-2471 Fax: Fran Schenk fschenk@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: 17--AFFINITY Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Email Address: Marie Prendergast James Cochran Veronica Clarke TBD Schoolwide-Veronica Clarke SavioStephen Zachary Clarke Counseling In Schools District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Room 510 Brooklyn, NY 11201 2018-19 CEP 3  rcintro@schools.nyc,.gov Phone Number: 718 969 41-- x 1044 Fax: Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 5613 Flatlands Avenue Brooklyn, NY 11234 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935-5618 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marie Prendergast-designee:AviJoffe James Cochran Veronica Clarke LindellMitchell Veronica Clarke SavioSteven Zachary Clarke JuanitoHingpis Samantha Bernardine *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Kathy BassooWatts Alma Hinds KathyannForde-James JacqelineMarshall Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? YCD VISION STATEMENT Section 4: CEP Overview AT OUR CORE, THE HIGH SCHOOL FOR YOUTH AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BELIEVES THAT IT IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY AS EDUCATORS TO PROVIDE ALL STUDENTS WITH EQUITABLE SUPPORT AND ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION REGARDLESS OF A STUDENT’S RACE, ETHNICITY, RELIGION, GENDER, GENDER IDENTITY, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, ECONOMIC CLASS, AND CITIZENSHIP STATUS. 2018-19 CEP 9  YCD MISSION STATEMENT THE MISSION OF THE HIGH SCHOOL FOR YOUTH AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT IS TO PREPARE ALL OF OUR STUDENTS TO BE INVOLVED MEMBERS OF THEIR COMMUNITY AND TO PREPARE THEM FOR HIGHER EDUCATION. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The High School for Youth and Community Development (YCD) is a small school of 500+ students situated on the Erasmus Campus in the Flatbush neighborhood of Brooklyn. The school opened in 2004 and has experienced increases in academic success and overall school climate for the past five years. Our student population is primarily African American (87.4%), with significant populations of Latin students, Caribbean Islanders, Southwest Asians, and South Asians. The number of students who qualify for free lunch is about 82% and Title 1 is about 75%. Our student-with-disabilities population has increased to 22% and our ELL population is about 14%. Our attendance rate has hovered around 88% for the last two years but has decreased as our enrollment has grown. In the 2017-2018 school year, our faculty collaborated in departments around various staff-identified problems of practice (POP) designed to address the Instructional Core. The school administration adapted the NYCDOE Collaborative Learning Through Peer Inter-visitation Toolkit and shared this with the teacher leadership to organize our inquiry work at the departmental level. On a biweekly basis throughout much of the school year, teachers visited classrooms in partnership with our Literacy Coach and Teacher Leaders using a research-based protocol. The data yielded from the visits, coupled with student performance data, informed each department's POP and Theory of Action (TOA). The Y.C.D. POP and TOA were referenced throughout this process at the administrative and teacher levels. Departments and cohorts then conducted an inquiry cycle to set goals and inform their work. The inquiry cycle culminated in a teacher-led meeting that provided teachers the opportunity to share their work around strategies and best practices. The Instructional Leadership Team, consisting of the Principal, two model teachers, and department leads, also piloted Inter-School visits using the School Performance Dashboard (SPD). Two schools were visited, with others planned for the 2017-18 school year, with an eye toward schools who had similar populations to our own, but slightly better impact and/or performance ratings on the SPD -- i.e. those schools that fell within Y.C.D.'s "zone of proximal development," to borrow a term from Vygotsky. In future planning, YCD is particularly interested in intervisiting with schools that are similar in population that are pursuing initiatives aligned with our CEP goals. Y.C.D. is a proud participant in the Office of Equity & Excellence's AP-for-All initiative, in partnership with the National Math & Science Initiative (NMSI). In the spring of 2016, one of our teacher leaders completed "Emerging Teacher Leader" certification with Teaching Matters, qualified as a UFT-DOE Peer Collaborative Teacher, and is now leading the effort to vertically align the core departments around the goal of maximizing access -- which necessarily means maximizing early access to rigorous curriculum and highly effective teaching -- for our students to Advanced Placement courses. Our PCT is also leading the effort to ensure that this CEP document reflects our deep commitment as a school community to the AP-for-All initiative. Y.C.D. continues to lead-by-example across the Erasmus Campus, expanding the number of students who enroll and sustain participation in Advanced Placement courses. Y.C.D. continues, despite the school program exigencies of a growing student population, to expand the number of AP courses offered by our school and to expand the number of seats made available to students campus wide. 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. YCD is part of a Focus status district for ELLs and has already initiated blended learning initiatives such as READ 180 for our ELL population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Using specific elements from the Framework for Great Schools as our guide, our strengths continue to grow in tangible ways, specifically in the area of collaborative Teachers through our teacher-driven professional development inquiry process that is designed and implemented by the Instructional Leadership Team (composed of teachers and Principal) and in the areas of family/community engagement through our ongoing partnerships with community-based organizations; our work toward creating a "hub" for parents at the school for services and support; substantial increases in college readiness percentages, college enrollment, and graduation through our best practices in providing a "surround sound" of support services for students Our school has made tremendous strides the past two years in accountability: We have maintained steady increases in credit accumulation; made significant gains in our college readiness metrics; and have sustained an 82% four year graduation rate. Our Quality Review in April 2015 yielded three Well Developed Scores in Indicators 1.1, 3.4, and 4.2. Teacher practice, particularly in the area of vertical alignment in the four core curricular areas has progressed. In 2017-2018, the Instructional Leadership Team crafted a comprehensive inquiry cycle to facilitate analysis of student skill gaps, create targeted interventions, and assessment and analysis of the interventions. This year (2018-2019) we are continuing our Inquiry Cycles that will be informed by our Learning Partners Team and Assessment Task Force (both teacher led) along with weekly departmental and/or cohort-based inter-visitations followed by comprehensive feedback to teachers. This year, we will continue to organize our school's efforts around the Framework for Great Schools to support our College Pathway initiative “From Aspiration, to Application, To Actuality.” This initiative is a multi-layered, scaffolded plan that impacts all students beginning in the 9th grade through freshman year of college and all disciplines through our accelerated learning plans-beginning with the Calculus Project, our mathematics plan to prepare students for AP Calculus in the 12th grade. As a result of a continued partnership with the National Math and Science Initiative (NMSI), in the 2018- 2019 year, we are working closely with an organization linked to Equal Opportunity Schools called Lead Higher and their "Elevate" initiative, which supports students in further developing study skills, executive functions and habits of mind. Our challenges and key focus areas are in instruction, specifically in the areas of literacy, differentiation, rigor, and ongoing assessments. We are in the process of developing a process to measure with precision, the progress of each student in focused standards and sub standards through Quarterly Assessments in Literacy and Mathematics. We have administered the base line assessment and have scheduled the remaining assessments for the year. Our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year is: A focused attention to student engagement through analysis of cognitively engaging content as evidenced by student driven questioning, discussion, and literacy tasks. We will focus on further developing literacy instruction across all core content areas. 2018-19 CEP 11  2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K537 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 480 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 5 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 26 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 79.4% % Reduced Lunch 10.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 15.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.55 5% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 45% 72.2% 1.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 129 99 85.2% 3.3% 22.5% 78.3% 2.5% 1.0% 8 29% 5.9 N/A N/A 82% 54% 85.3% 9% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In 2017-2018, the Instructional Leadership Team continued the process of designing a comprehensive plan to utilize inquiry cycles to facilitate analysis of student skill gaps, create targeted interventions, and assessment and analysis of the interventions. Progress has been made year over year in two crucial indicators: 1) the number of students achieving College Readiness; and 2) the number of students taking Advanced Placement courses and subsequently scoring a 2 or better on the AP exam. The needs of the school's program and our growing population have placed strain on the number of sections of AP courses we can offer. At the Erasmus Campus, we're part of AP-for-All, and so we are building (long-term) toward increasing access for students to advanced courses not just in our own school but across the Campus. As we transition toward a richer program in our school and across the Campus over the next two years, we do not want to see progress toward college and career readiness slip. At the start of the school year (Sept 2018), 26.8% of the student body is college ready in at least one subject (English or Math); our AP exam results had just under half the students scoring a 2 or better. In working to build upon and sustain these metrics, we build momentum for further expansion of our school's course offerings and our students' future college and career prospects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #1 -- Rigorous Instruction By June 2019, 48% of the student body shall be "college ready" and 30% of AP students shall score a 2+ on their spring exams. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Leaders in all four core subject areas will participate in Laying the Foundation training provided by the National Math and Science Initiative through the Office of AP for All core teachers July 2018-June 2019 AP for ALL Coordinator In our efforts to increase student capacity in their AP exams, 100% of teachers in Mathematics will participate in the Calculus Project, an initiative entering its fourth year, designed to accelerate math learning for all students. The professional development and NGLS planning and implementation enhance and directly support building college readiness in mathematics in all four grades. This will be evidenced by increased numbers of students meeting college readiness metrics in mathematics by the 12 th grade. This will also be reflected in the number of students completing the IA and Geometry Regents by the end of the 9 th grade. This will be evidenced by observation data and shared resources on Google drive as well as marking period and mid marking period data analysis, student performance on Quarterly Assessments in mathematics. Additional systems include: ongoing review of Professional Development Plan, ongoing review of student program needs using the New Visions Portal, ongoing assessment review informed by quarterly assessments and mock AP exams, ongoing review of school based role and responsibility plans. By December 2018, 100% of teachers will engage in a comprehensive process of design and revision of curriculum unit maps and plans to fully incorporate literacy planning, instruction and assessment (diagnostic, formative, and summative) into all of the content areas, especially with regards to reading interventions, resulting in increased reading comprehension for students, as measured by diagnostic and benchmark assessments (both formative and summative.) By December 2018, School leaders and faculty have an effective and transparent process in place to purposefully evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the Next Master Teacher Literacy Coach AP Supervision, AP Operations All students with a special focus on: September 2018-August 2019 ELLs Lowest 1/3 Economically Disadvantaged Instructional Support Over-Aged/Under- credited All students with a special focus on: September 2018-December 2019 AP Supervision; A.P. Instructional Support ELLs Lowest 1/3 Economically Disadvantaged Math Lead Teacher Master Teacher; Model Teacher; Literacy Coach 2018-19 CEP 15 Generation Learning Standards, with a focus on building alignment and coherence between what is taught and how it is taught. (from QR Rubric) Instructional Support Through targeted practices to increase parent involvement and knowledge of student progress, 80% of students that are identified as being “almost on track” will move to “on track” by the end of the school year. These practices include: ongoing parent workshops in 4 core disciplines, transcript analysis, college readiness, one on one parent conferences throughout the day, parent mentoring. September 2018-June 2019 A.P. Instructional Support; Parent Coordinator Over-Aged/Under-credited All Parents with a special focus on parents of: ELLs Lowest 1/3 Economically Disadvantaged Instructional Support Over-Aged/Under-credited. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through targeted practices to increase parent involvement and knowledge of student progress, 100% of our parents will be provided substantial outreach and training by January 2019. These outreach practices include: ongoing parent workshops in 4 core disciplines, transcript analysis, college readiness, one on one parent conferences throughout the day. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Software such as ALEKS for Math and APEX in al subject areas; NewsEla in reading; ELT in all core subjects and in enrichment classes such as music, video, dance and theatre; Cohort Inquiry Team work is integrated into the time allotted for teachers every Tuesday; College Access for All Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring -- Led by school based Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) and Master Teacher, James Cochran  College-readiness: Baseline data at start of September 2018; Current data in January 2019; Final data in June 2019. Projected data in October 2018, December 2018, March 2019, and May 2019. o Math Department and ELA Department will develop internal metrics, based on the Regents Exams & SAT Tests, for projecting the college readiness levels of students. Data generated from these metrics should be collected no earlier than the first week and no later than the last week of the indicated months, and reported no later than the end of the first week of the month following. o Rolling SAT results coming in throughout the year as pockets of students take the exam at various offerings will be used to inform the projected metrics, especially in December and forward.  Progress toward Advanced Placement success: Baseline data in September 2018 shall be % of students in AP classes who are currently “college ready” averaged with aggregate student performance on a modified “mock AP exam” given during a single period before the midpoint in September 2018; Final data in July 2019; Projected data will come with the AP-for-All Mock Exams and performance assessments, whose dates for 2018-19 school year are not yet announced.  ENL/MLL progress: Baseline data in September 2018 consisting of the current aggregate performance level scores of all ENL students (may be updated prior to end of September 2018 if new students with new data arrive); Final data in late spring (May/June 2019; post NYSESLAT); projected data following the conclusion of the first five marking periods o ongoing assessment data from the stand alone ENL/MLL classes will provide the projected data, which is why the marking periods serve as the projected data collection points. This projected data should be shared with the students’ teachers to calibrate to see if similar language progress is being seen in the other classes.  Data should be collected, aggregated, and reported no sooner than the midpoint but no later than the last week of the indicated months. Clarifying Information  College Readiness by CUNY and SAT requirements are: o NYS English Regents 75, SAT I Verbal 480 o Algebra OR Geometry Regents 70, Algebra II/Trig 65, SAT Math 500  The Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) will review the progress monitoring data as it becomes available and recommend changes to either the progress monitoring tools or the overall goals as necessary. The data will inform the ongoing work of Vertical Alignment across the departments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Primary data source for Literacy Instruction will include Quarterly Assessments in ELA and data gleaned from NewsELA and other software to track reading progress. We will also use ADVANCE data; Student Performance data on the New Visions (NV) Portal, and School Performance Dashboard metrics on Impact. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Social Emotional Supports include the following: CBO and social work support in attendance improvement, clinical counseling, leadership development, conflict mediation, college access and readiness, peer mentoring. We've seen a plateau in student attendance data (SY 2017-18; 85.2%), with average attendance rates hovering in the low to mid 80 percent range over time. When we review student survey data from SY 2017-18, 58% of students agree or strongly agree with the statement "most students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions;" 60% of students agree or strongly agree with the statement "most students work when they are supposed to;" 72% of students agree or strongly agree with the statement "teachers give specific feedback about how I can improve my work;" and 47% of students agree or strongly agree with the statement "teachers support me when I am upset." Focused efforts by the school to move these numbers, coupled with concerted efforts to more directly engage with families, should lead to improvements in student attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #2 -- Supportive Environment By June 2019, the average attendance rate of students will be 90% or higher, as measured by the average daily attendance across the school year. 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers receive ongoing support in providing holistic approaches to teaching and learning . All teachers receive in depth training in clinical approaches to responding to trauma as experienced by our students. All teachers CBO and DOE staff meet in various teams throughout the week to discuss students using DOE, Affinity, and school based data reports (Data Portal, School-based Data Tracker, STARS reports) Work with Counseling in Schools (CIS), our lead partner in social emotional supports, has started its fourth year with the goal of increasing the attendance and engagement of students who had struggled in previous years. Building on this success, the program has integrated art therapy for the past three years. This year, CIS has facilitated an Anime Club at the request of students. Student attendance, progress reports, and dean anecdotes all inform the measure of success of the goal. All students with a special focus on students who are presenting academic, social/emotional, attendance issues and or indications of troubled affect. All students with a special focus on students who are presenting academic, social/emotional, attendance issues and or indications of troubled affect. A.P. Instructional Support; SBST including school social worker A.P. O A.P. Instructional Support SBST A.P.O bi-weekly during Tuesday professional learning in cohort groupings and additional targeted trainings weekly Tuesday SBST meetings weekly meetings including Tuesday SBST meetings The school provides the following supports in clinically trained human resources: Two full-time Social Workers; three social work interns; Individual/Group counseling; family involvement; college readiness, Out of School Time program; Young Men’s/ Women’s Leadership Group; post suspension counseling supports. All students with a special focus on students who are presenting academic, social/emotional, Daily through classroom intervention visits provided by A.P. O 2018-19 CEP 19  attendance issues and or indications of troubled affect. SBST; guidance supports; daily during period 6 art therapy meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Support for Family understanding of social emotional learning will be folded into parent workshops every month during PTA meetings and additional special event meetings with parents, with the training provided by key personnel on our School Based Support Team (SBST.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CBO’s; Mediation specialists, anti-bullying curricula; conferences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring -- Led by S.B.S.T., Team Lead (A.P.O Raizy Silberstein)   Student average attendance rate: the daily school attendance percentage averaged on a rolling basis. Baseline data in September 2018 is the average attendance rate for the 2017-18 school year. Final Data is the average attendance rate on the last instructional day before the Regents Exams in June 2019. Progress data shall be reported for the month just ended on the first school day of the new month (i.e. September 2018 average attendance data reported on Monday October 1, 2018). Student Survey Data, 4 focus statements: the baseline data is the reported percentages (mentioned in the goal) for each of the focus statements from the 2017-18 School Survey. Final Data will be obtained in June 2019 with the preliminary release of the 2018-19 School Survey. Progress data shall come from administering a survey to a representative sample of the student body over a three-day period of time in mid-October, mid-December, mid-February, mid-April (timed to coincide with the administration of the actual School Survey), and a final time in early June. o The mid-April and early-June administrations of the in-house survey will be used to check our survey methodology. If the numbers are dramatically different, our “representative sample” approach was insufficient and we can use that for planning for future years. 2018-19 CEP 20   Student participation in the School Survey: the in-house/mini surveys throughout the year can include an agree/disagree question with a statement, “It is important that my school conduct surveys so that school leaders can know students’ opinions” so that while we may have only a small representative sample of the student body taking the in-house surveys, we can gauge student interest in the surveys. Also, the SBST can conduct student focus groups to raise student awareness around both the surveys and the issues measured by the surveys; quotes & take-aways from these focus groups can inform progress monitoring toward the goal. Clarifying Information   Students take the NYC School survey in the spring each year. A comprehensive plan by the SBST team to administer this survey on both a single day and on a rolling basis during the spring would would serve to increase student participation in the survey. Further, efforts at progress monitoring during the year will normalize the survey for the students. It’s important to emphasize that this is student perception of these statements. It does not mean we don’t support them or that they don’t work when they’re supposed to, it means the students agree or disagree, based on their perceptions, to the degree indicated. Questions to Consider:  What routines and practices can we implement across the school to more positively influence student perception of these statements?  What can we do to track progress on these goals as the year unfolds?  What impact might our instructional practices have on student attendance and the survey responses? What supports do you need to reflect upon and to shift instruction in support of these goals? Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily, period and weekly attendance data; mock survey data on safety and supportive environment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 4.2 Strengths: All teachers are engaged in inquiry regarding reading, writing strategies across the curriculum, high levels of student engagement and rich discussions are evident in most classrooms as reflected in ADVANCE ratings. PD Plan and teacher meetings on Monday are being continually revised to ensure that ALL, not just most, teachers are providing effective practices. 4.3 Most teachers are effectively using the best practices of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) , Depth Of Knowledge (DOK), and targeted goals based on level of performance to provide multiple entry points for all students, particularly ELLs and SWDs. Substantial growth reflected in April 2015 Quality Review and subsequent Principal Performance Reviews as evidenced by Well Developed Rating in this tenet which reported well organized teacher led common planning time and professional development that encompassed Inquiry Cycle of planning, lesson facilitation, review of student work on performance task, data analysis and subsequent adaptations made to instructional plans. In September 2018, our school will begin a three year inquiry process as a Learning Partner School in collaboration with two high schools in Brooklyn. Our professional learning focus is "Literacy Instruction for All." For nearly three years, our teachers have been examining the curriculum and the instructional and assessment practices of their departments. We have been striving to "break down the silos," to get 9th grade ELA to talk to 10th grade ELA, to get 10th grade Social Studies to talk to 11th grade Social Studies, etc. We have had great success and we seek to push the momentum further. We're working to align across the grade levels on the skills we teach. We have a team of teachers seeking to earn their ENL certification (NYS TESOL license) and we have the AP-for-All Master Teacher for the Erasmus Campus facilitating teacher teams to implement best practices for all students across all grades and departments -- and across schools. When we look at the work that has been accomplished, we recognize both that progress has been made but that work remains to be done. At the conclusion of the 2017-18 school year, the self-assessment conducted by each department using the rubric was as follows: ELA - 3.00; Math - 2.17; Science - 2.00; Social Studies - 2.17; and the aggregate score for the school was a 2.335. To that end we are using a number of tools provided by AP-for-All to guide and assess our continuing work on vertical alignment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 22  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #3 -- Collaborative Teachers By June 2019, the four core subject departments will have vertically aligned their curricula at the Proficient (3.5) level as measured on the AP-for-All “Vertical Curriculum Self Assessment Rubric.” 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Strategically schedule the number of teacher led Intra-visitations organized around the Danielson Framework to increase, rigor, student engagement, and to strengthen instructional norms and coherence . All Teachers Ongoing throughout the 2018 2019 year In both departmental and cross curricular, cohort-based PD meetings, teachers will analyze the quality of their questions and techniques; create and discuss questions that prompt redirection, probing, rephrasing to ensure comprehension and inspire argument, extended thinking and reflection. All teachers Monday professional learning time; throughout the day during teacher prep time throughout the 2018 2019 year Principal and Supervisory staff; LPP Team; Asessment Task Force Principal and Supervisory staff; Literacy coach In PD meetings, teachers will research and plan multiple assessment techniques that directly check for understanding, and reassess student learning targets. Quarterly assessments in Mathematics and Literacy will be used to track student progress.Focused feedback on 1E of the Danielson Framework, professional development around UBD, and collaboration between Instructional Support Services (ISS) teachers and administrators has aided in the creation of learning activities that allow for multiple points of access for all students. Continued analysis and revision of curriculum maps, as discussed above, will lead to greater alignment to standards and greater coverage of standards; further, continued collaboration between the instructional support faculty and teachers will lead to increased access for students to the curriculum. Principal and Supervisory staff; LPP Team; Assessment Task Force All teachers Monday professional learning and weekly on Wednesdays during working lunch throughout the 2018 2019 year The ELA department will continue to lead curricular planning around vertical alignment. All teachers Principal, APO, Model ELA teacher, Literacy Coach Daily during ELA department prep period throughout 2018-19 CEP 24  3b – Parent and Family Engagement the 2018 2019 year How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All communications will be fully translated, especially for families of ELLs. Open door parent /student policy- Direct contact to immediately address issues and concerns of students and family involving support staff (PC, Guidance, CBOs, Teacher/staff) Informative weekly meetings with PC to plan and strategize around parental involvement and troubleshooting any family issues and concerns (attendance, behavior and social issues in the home) that may arise and hinder student academic achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development training and resources in UDL (CAST); PD training in CTT teaching models; leveled libraries and non fiction collection, Reading Diagnostic; and continued support from Counseling In Schools. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we expect all inquiry and evaluation processes in the school to indicate well developed practices in instructional and curricular alignments, school culture as represented by articulated expectations and the distribution of organizational resources to reflect alignment with our school wide goals in relation to QR 5.1 The instructional Leadership Team will lead “in-house” data collections for QR 5.1 in December 2018 and in March 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quality Review Rubric; Observation and Intra-visitation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from visits by external stakeholders and feedback conversations between staff and supervisors indicate a general need to retool around the precise practices and thinking we have as a community on assessment. The aggregate score of teachers on component 3(d) "Assessment" was a 2.84. By looking both at the practice of individual teachers and the general practices of the school around how, precisely, we know whether our students are learning and have learned the content and skills we need them to learn, we will move teacher practice and student achievement in a positive direction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #4 -- Effective School Leadership By June 2019, every teacher shall consistently rate Effective or higher in the AP-for-All focus component 3(d) “Using Assessment in Instruction” of the Advance rubric. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School will organize itself through a process of inquiry, feedback and deep analysis of school infrastructure at all levels. Development of Principal’s Leadership Team to organize work in three key areas: Teaching and Professional Development, Operations and Data, School Culture. All staff Principal Administrative Cabinet Master Teacher weekly duirng professional learning on Monday, tuesday and Wednesday working lunch By January, 2019, the Assessment Task force that includes our Literacy Coach and three teachers will conduct two learning cycles (2 months each) that include intervisitations for the purpose of gathering low inference data; analysis of observation data and student performance tasks and metrics and a report of recommendations for further growth in teacher practice. Through the application of targeted feedback. Teachers and administration will engage in cycles of feedback with the goal of improving teacher performance under 1E, 2A, and 3B of the Danielson Framework. Ongoing “norming” support will be provided to supervisory staff to ensure alignment with Danielson Framework rating criteria. All teachers will receive at a minimum, their required observations along with a mid-year and end of year meeting to discuss professional growth; all teachers invited to participate in targeted external professional development meetings and conferences with follow up “turnkey” for staff. Targeted Intra-visitations around vertically aligned best practices provided across the school. Peer observations with guidance from Principal and supervisory staff conducted on a targeted basis. teaching staff two month Principal cycles of daily activity Master Teacher Supervisory and teaching staff September 2018-June2019 Principal and Supervisory staff teaching staff September 2018-June 2019 Supervisory staff Master Teacher Model Teacher Math Lead Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 27  Principal will provide a State of the School meeting in September 2018 and March 2019. Monthly parent newsletter, quarterly Parent Association Meetings, Parent to parent mentoring program. Meet and Greet luncheon with Executive Board and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development Opportunities for supervision. Peer observations. Schedule adjustments for common planning time on bi-weekly basis and ongoing teacher intra-visitations; fiscal resources allocated for Model Teacher and professional training in Advanced Placement courses; participation in multiple instructional planning pilot programs in science, history and English Language Arts. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring -- 4a - Admin Cabinet (M. Prendergast team lead); 4b - The Assessment-in-Instruction Task Force (Team Lead TBD) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE data; Quality Review rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Communication with Families is comprehensive-use of newsletters, biweekly meetings; one on one parent/student meetings; transcript reviews with every student in the school. Multiple layers of teacher and staff teams that speak to each other through team liaisons. Monthly and bi monthly parent meetings focused on various aspects of high school and college readiness expectations and needs. improvements made in providing written translations of all parent documents. But we feel we can and must do more. When we look at individual teacher practice around general parent outreach, something is falling through the cracks. Parents claim that they're not getting contacted, and while we have knowledge that contacts are being made, we have lacked tools to systematically track and assess this contact. Further, only a little better than one-third of families participate in the NYC parent survey about our school. If parents/families felt more engaged with our school, if they were contacted by more faculty on a more frequent basis, their engagement with our community -- and their willingness to participate in activities like the school survey -- should increase. More parents take the survey, we'll have better feedback to plan methods for future engagement of families and have more family input on the initiatives of our school beyond our core group of committed parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal #5 -- Strong Family & Community Tie By June 2019, direct parent outreach (including face-to-face meetings, phone calls, emails, and custom/non-mass text messages) each month shall exceed 60% of all families, with 100% of all families being contacted directly by someone on staff at least once every two months. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly meetings with our parent leaders from the Parent Association Board, addressing issues and concerns, brainstorming and strategizing/planning on continually expanding meaningful parental involvement in school. Informative weekly meetings with PC to plan and strategize around parental involvement and troubleshooting any family issues and concerns (attendance, behavior and social issues in the home) that may arise and hinder student academic achievement.) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Community Throughout the year Principal; Parent Coordinator Family Community Throughout the year Principal; Parent Coordinator Bi Monthly College Access for All Team meeting to govern and support our College Pathway initiatives. All Students Ongoing College Pathway Coordinator Quarterly Review of work done in partnership with CBOs based on quarterly progress reports submitted to NYSED. CBOs July 2018-June 2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Counseling In Schools, Trio program at Brooklyn College, College Pathway Coordinator/Consultant Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Speakers and workshop facilitators. College Coaches; Teachers facilitating Common Core workshops. College exposure trips for parents/guardians. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring — Led by Family Engagement Taskforce, Chantal Desdunes team lead (Avi Joffe co-lead)  Parent engagement: Baseline Data 52%, unless taskforce can offer an alternative data set; Final Data June 2019; progress monitoring on a monthly basis, suggest use of common spreadsheet although taskforce may come up with alternative method  Participation rate by parents: Baseline Data 52%; Final Data June 2019; progress monitoring will be percentage of families represented at each parent association meeting and each open school night, with “interim surveys” offered those nights to keep a feel on family satisfaction. Clarifying Information  A Google spreadsheet will be created and shared with every staff member. The sheet will enable everyone to input their name and the date and method of direct contact. This sheet will replace individual Parent Outreach trackers  The aforementioned sheet will enable everyone to see at a glance families that have and have not been contacted  Teachers, Paraprofessionals, and Guidance Counselors will be given monthly “Talking Points” to ensure that every direct contact -- especially face-to-face, phone calls, and emails -- communicates information about the school. While information will vary from month, reminders to invite parents to attend parent association meetings will be on every set of talking points. Possible outreach topics can include student behavior in class (need for improvement as well as positive/good performance); progress on IEP goals; poor or strong performance on class assessments, with next steps for at home; a monthly check-in to invite the parent to attend a school event, especially parent-teacher night or the next parent association meeting, or just to say something nice about the child.  Positive parent outreach needs to be a priority; we want parents to pick up the phone when they see it’s us. A  good rule of thumb for building trust is the 5:1 ratio of positive to negative communications (i.e. for every negative communication, strive to communicate positively five times) In 2016-17, 39% of parents participated in the NYC School Survey. In 2017-18, 52% of parents participated. We have increased year-upon-year, but we’re still not reaching enough parents to be able to fully trust the positive feedback we’re being given on the NYC school survey Questions to Consider  What will you do and what supports do you need to achieve direct contact with 60% of families each month? (we want to reach everyone across every two month period)  What can we do to boost parent participation in the NYC School Survey?  How can and should our school go about increasing parent voice and participation?  How can we involve parents in the achievement of our 4 other CEP Goals, especially Goal #1 Rigorous Instruction Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. mock survey data; parent attendance data to school events; parent outreach data from google Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Inquiry teams meet weekly and analyze student data. Teachers discuss areas of academic concern and craft interventions on an individual student level. Inquiry teams meet weekly and analyze student data. Teachers discuss areas of academic concern and craft interventions on an individual student level. Inquiry teams meet weekly and analyze student data. Teachers discuss areas of academic concern and craft interventions on an individual student level. Inquiry teams meet weekly and analyze student data. Teachers discuss areas of academic concern and craft interventions on an Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ELA Regents Tutoring (literacy instruction, practice exams, targeted instruction) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction After school T-F/Saturday School Small group instruction/Tutoring Small group instruction One on one One on one and small group Algebra tutoring +AP Calculus prep; Geometry peer tutoring; Trigonometry peer tutoring After school T-F/Saturday School Living Environment Tutoring Small group instruction After school T-F/Saturday School Chemistry tutoring One on one Physics tutoring One on one and small group Global History and US History Prep and peer tutoring Small group instruction One on one After school T-F/Saturday School 2018-19 CEP 32 One on one and small group Student/Parent workshop College Readiness workshops Attendance and Mandated counseling One on one counseling Crisis interventions After school on targeted days during semester; During school dayas needed Mediation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) individual student level. The SBST/Data team meets weekly and analyzes student data. The guidance counselor and data specialist identify student academic and social emotional struggles and makes appropriate in-house referrals for counseling and identifies interventions for each student. 2018-19 CEP 33  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 70 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Extended Learning Time; peer mentoring; part-time employment support school books and supplies; travel expenses beyond school hours; clothes and linens Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 34  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 CEP 35  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Partner with HR representatives from New Visions and The New Teacher Collaborative to access candidates with high quality training. Expanding our school based recruitment team to attend hiring events, review resumes and participate in hiring process. participation in multiple professional development programs offered by New Visions, National Math and Science Initiative, active partnering with Teaching Fellow and Teacher Collaborative Mentors, high retention rates are a reflection of teacher leadership opportunities, teacher led professional development, commitment of fiscal resources to support teachers in their development and technology. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers engage in professional development on a weekly basis that includes double sessions on a monthly basis. There are two broad strains in PD that are interwoven with each other. Curriculum/Performance Task planning to ensure that we meet our goals surrounding the school-wide focus on literacy and evidence. Teachers rotate this training with Cohort data analysis and skill acquisition analysis. We are also engaged in a reading initiative that has been folded into our literacy work. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. As a schoolwide program, our resources are allocated school wide with a concentration on SWDs and Ells 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 36  We are a school wide program. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers designed and implemented school-wide grading policy. The Instructional Leadership Team partners with the Cabinet to provide ongoing review and support for professional development plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 373,814.00 0 0 0 2,411,009.00 X X 2018-19 CEP 37 Column B Section Reference(s) 11,13,16,19,22 11,13,16,19,22  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 CEP 38   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 39  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K537, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The High School for Youth and Community Development will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 40  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 41  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K537, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 CEP 42  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 44  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At YCD, there are 42 ELLs, 8 of these students have less than 5 months in the country, and the remainder have between 1 and 6 years in the country. There is one full-time ESL teacher that gives stand alone classes that are separated by level. Our ESL teacher pushes into one Global History class in the 10th grade and English classes at the 9th, 10th, and 11th grade level to support the ELL students. For the past five years, the ELL population at the High School for Youth and Community Development has exhibited the same trending need for further support and instruction in the modalities of reading and writing. Our students have consistently expressed that both the ELA Regents and the US/Global History Regents (all substantial writing-focused assessments) provide the greatest challenge and concern for them as they make their way towards graduation status. This past spring 2018 semester, the Principal and Peer Collaborative Teacher (we are both licensed social studies teachers) co-taught a class of primarily ENL students who were scheduled to take the Global History Regents in June 2018. Our pedagogy focused on developing their reading comprehension and writing skills using the Global IV curriculum. Nearly 50% of our students received a passing grade on the regents exam including IEP students who achieved a grade of 55+. We will continue this effort during our summer program. Teacher Teams for ELLs engage in planning for content, performance tasks and team teacher models. In planning, teachers use the Specific Considerations for English Language Learners as a planning in context tool to ensure that instructional planning is addressing language development and acquisition, and academic achievement. Social emotional supports are culturally attuned to the needs of the student. Performance Tasks are appropriately scaffolded to prepare ELLs for the Common Core ELA Regents. Team teacher models are designed to support the specific needs of the lesson. To deepen and broaden ELL language acquisition skills, we have partnered with the Educational Video Company (EVC) to provide services to the ESL students. The ESL teacher and EVC representative collaborate and work with the students on a weekly basis. The program centers around the students creating a documentary film. Students research a variety of topics and interview a diversified group of individuals. Students will also be introduced to different kinds of writing, as well as media literacy, in order to open up future interests and job opportunities while preparing them for a future that will combine reading, writing, and technology. Students will also be encouraged to develop their native language literacy by reading and responding to texts in their native language. In addition students increase and accelerate their reading skills through targeted use of an online program called NewsEla, which measures student progress in reading levels in non-fiction texts which are presented to students in reading levels 2018-19 CEP 48  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information that correspond to their level of comprehension and increase in complexity as students increase their comprehension. Because student writing (and reading) is a major focus we will be partnering with various writing programs throughout the New York City area, including Educational Video Company, Power Learning, the NYC National Writing Project, and the Tribeca Film Festival. Our literacy coach will support our 2018-2019 initiative "Literacy Instruction for All" which focuses on best practices in ELL instruction as a platform to improve teacher practice across curricula areas. In addition, as a new participant in the DOE Learning Partners Program, we are focusing on ELL instruction as part of a triad of schools linked together in this program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: High quality Professional Development related to the programs we have created for ELLs will be provided throughout the school year to all faculty and staff at YCD. The professional development will be designed and conducted by the ELL teacher who, in turn, will participate in ongoing professional learning at the Affinity level as well as PD offered through the department of education.Topics to be covered include: Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs and The Additive Approach (How to Incorporate Students' Native Languages in the Classroom). The goal is to have at least three two hour professional development sessions throughout the year, with the first one to be held in November. Also, the ELL teacher will focus on professional learning that supports working effectively with SIFE students. ELL teachers across the Erasmus Campus will participate in professional learning that will include: team teaching modalities, close reading, and language acquisition in content areas. Two additional layer of professional learning around best practices in ELL instruction have been added for the 2018-2019 academic year: YCD is beginning Year 1 as a Learning Partner's School-part of a selected triad of similar schools who engage in cycles of learning around a shared learning focus area (LFA). All three schools have select ELL academic performance as an LFA. YCD is focusing on best practices in ELL instruction under our "Literacy Instruction for All" initiative. 2018-19 CEP 49  Part C: Professional Development With support from New Visions-four to six content area teachers have applied to the Hunter College ELL certification program. Our goal is to expand ELL supports in Literacy through content area teachers in each department. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement will begin with the initial parent orientation during the ELL identification process and the two school-sponsored parent-teacher nights/afternoons throughout the year. In addition, parents of ELLs will be invited to participate in two "Evenings with the Authors" at which students will perform readings of their original writings created in their classrooms. The students will MC and host the event (with the guidance and support of the ELL teacher). In addition, refreshments will be served and copies of the students' publication to celebrate the students' writing achievements. Other parent events include a school sponsored "Social" for the families of ELLs. There will also be parental engagement activities in the form of specific meetings for ELL parents that address particular issues for their children, which include requirements for graduation, college preparation, and ensuring that ELL parents have a voice in their children's education. Parents are notified in writing and by phone. The parent coordinator maintains records of sign in sheets and agendas. A copy is left in a central location as well. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2018-19 CEP 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District I7 School Name High School for Youth and Community Deve Borough select one School Number 537 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marie Prendergast Coach Ruth Stern ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ted Myczewski Teacher/Subject Area Camille Boyd Teacher/Subject Area Teresa Lee Related-Service Provider Juanito Hingpis Superintendent Ritchie Centron Assistant Principal Pamela Washington Coach Asia Gilyard; Fatima Maqsood School Counselor Kevin Odoi; Jon Sinovoi Parent Kathy Bassoo Watts Parent Coordinator Chantal Desdunes Field Support Center Staff Member Jamie Baez Other (Name and Title) Jessica LongAffinity ELL Lead C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 na Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 508 2018-19 CEP 52 Total number of ELLs 42+ ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? teacher created assessments 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? professional development / financial support for material resources 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYC Performance Tasks; ELL Periodic Assessment 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? professional development in data driven instruction 2018-19 CEP 53  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] na 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, ELA/Math regents 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? professional development in data driven instruction. Staff utilizes reports from the New Visions Data Portal, our school-based Data Tracker that provides a snapshot of student progress and performance in between marking periods. Staff is provided findings from Quarterly Assessments in Math and ELA to inform planning. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. YCD offers 1 Stand- Alone classroom and 3 integrated classrooms.ELLS grouped together in mixed proficiency levels in CTT classrooms only. Students are programmed in stand-alone classrooms based on proficiency level. Newcomer through developing proficiency levels are programmed in one stand-alone class, long-term students are programmed in the other stand-alone class. Our periods are 45 minutes long. In integrated classrooms, students of all proficiency levels receive support in 3 ELA classrooms . The teachers providing support in the integrated classrooms include 2 fully licensed ELL teachers, one dual licensed (SPED/ELA) content teacher and a special Education teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. na c. DL program. If applicable. na 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Through stand alone and integrated classes 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. through integrated teaching in targeted content classes-content delivered and supported using UDL best practices. Also ELLs in stand alone classrooms are supported in accelerating language acquisition skills in a documentary film making class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL teacher conducts ongoing assessments 2018-19 CEP 54  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Through differentiated stand alone classes. Increased professional learning for ENL and content area teachers in effective practices for SIFE students. We also use "Special Considerations for teachers of ELL students" document as a guide and resource for teacher evaluation. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? UDL-best practices; Reading Assessment resources (example NewsELA) 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? common planning time and coach support for targeted teachers; CTT in targeted classrooms 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. PM and Saturday school tutoring support; Resource Room support. Offered in ELA with translated documents and reading materials 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Increased support for language and reading acquisition for 1st year ELLs and SIFE students 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? na 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All after school academic and enrichment programs are offered to ELLs. Our school has a majority of families new to the country. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Programs such as NewsELA, ALEKS (for Math) and Reading Plus. Google translator; on site translation when possible; Also documentary film making class for targeted ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Translation services provided in ENL and content area classrooms 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Ongoing review of reports and in tangent with support services from our Affinity Group 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Campus wide professional learning and mentoring of new ELL teachers 2018-19 CEP 55  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). after school enrichment; Social gatherings for ELLs and their families; PTA bi monthly meetings focusing on regents support, and graduation requirements 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Film studies, Forensics, theatre 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? na Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL staff receive ongoing professional development at the school level and campus inter school level through our Literacy Coach and professional development team as well as external supports at the Affinity and Superintendent level. We have 1 full-time ENL teacher and a dual licensed ELA/ENL teacher. In the 2018-2019 school year, we anticipate additional content area teachers receiving ELL certification. All teachers receive targeted professional development in best practices for teaching ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL specific PD is embedded in our professional learning plan and will be enhanced this year with one on one support for content area teachers who struggle with their ELL population. Records are kept through agendas and other materials in google docs. This year we are archiving our google classroom professional learning series which includes best practices for teachers of ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have ongoing parent/guardian meetings throughout the year as well as PTA meetings (non Mandated) that are geared for our ELL community. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 56  In addition to what has already been described- we have parent to parent outreach (based on home language needs) around the specific needs of ELLs and their families. The PC partners with CBOs and has provided access to legal services for documented and undocumented students and their families. ELL specific College Access services are also provided to help families deal with the labyrinth of steps they have to take to ensure college access for their children in CUNY and SUNY schools. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. In the 2018-2019 school year, we are part of the DOE Learning Partners Program. We have selected ELL Literacy Instruction as our learning focus as part of a triad of schools linked together in this program. 2018-19 CEP 57 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mary Prendergast, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 58  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Youth and Comm School DBN: 17K537 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marie Prendergast Title Principal Pamela Washington Assistant Principal Chantal Desdunes Parent Coordinator Ted Myczewski ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kathy Bassoo Watts Parent Camille Boyd/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Teresa Lee/Global History Teacher/Subject Area Ruth Stern Asia Gilyard Coach Coach Kevin Odoi; Jon Sinovoi School Counselor Ritchie Centron Jessica long Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Fatima Maqsood Other college access coach Other student Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 CEP 59  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 537 School Name: HS for Youth and Community Developm Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Chantal Desdunes Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. There are two main types of translation needs at our school:  a. Written: Documents - birth certificates, transcripts, health records, court documents etc. These documents are translated by school staff fluent in the language. In cases of transcripts where the amount of credits and subject area is often not clear, documents are faxed to approved NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for processing.ENL teacher and guidance counselors created a shared Google Sheets file that is updated on a bi-monthly basis. b. Oral: Spoken translation for non-English speaking adults and students. Many of the parents and students arriving from non-English speaking countries speak only their native language. Upon entering the school, the guidance counselor identifies the language spoken by the family and enrolls the help of a translator. At present, we have native speakers of Haitian-Creole, French, Spanish, Russian and Urdu. Another important aspect of our 2018-19 CEP 60  translation needs is the fact that we do not have a bilingual program (not enough students in any grade level). Students are taught in core subject areas in English and many times other students translate for newcomers. Parent/guardians' language preferences are determined by the Home Language Identification Surveys, Student Emergency Contact Cards, and ATS Bio Reports, Blue Card data, the ATS Report of Preferred Languages, Teacher Surveys, and Parent Surveys. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Haitian Creole, French, Spanish, Arabic, English, Urdu, and Bengali 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent-teacher conference announcements: Before semi-annual parent-teacher conferences After-school program information: At the beginning of each new semester when after-school programs are beginning NYSESLAT/Regents testing dates: April 2017 Letters from school leadership: September 2016, February 2017 2018-19 CEP 61  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent meetings are Sept. 28, Oct. 19, Nov. 16, March 16, and May 18. Translation requests will be sent 2 weeks before these meetings. interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The ESL teacher and office staff provide each parent, whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services, with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered language, and instructions on how to obtain such services. All notification documents can be accessed at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 62  Twice a year parents/guardians of ELLs will be administered a survey in their home language about how they interpret the quality and availability of the services provided to them. A focus group will be held of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on the quality of services provided. 2018-19 CEP 63 
