2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K561 School Name: WILLIAMSBURG PREPARATORY SCHOOL Principal: MICHAEL SHADRICK 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Williamsburg Preparatory School 14K561 School Number (DBN): 14k561 9_12 257 North 6 Street, Brooklyn, NY 11211 718-302-2306 Phone Number: 718-302-3726 Fax: Michael Shadrick mshadri@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Michael Shadrick Wayne Tobias Shameka Grinage Kelly Witkowski Jenny Amador Edgerrin Grinage Ronald Landon NA District Information JaniceRoss Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110, Brooklyn, NY 11221 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 455 4539 Phone Number: (718) 455 4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Field Support Center FSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-4456 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michael Shadrick Wayne Tobias Shameka Grinage NA Jenny Amador Edgerrin Grinage Ronald Landon NA KellyWitkowski Audrey Landon *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Assistant Principal/Staff Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Jenny Amador Gladys Rhodes Jamie Licata Adam Kuthe Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Member/ Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? To get better and defy the odds so that no one falls outside the box of success. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Williamsburg Preparatory School is a small school with a big mission. We take ordinary kids and get extraordinary results. We provide a college preparatory education that focuses on supporting the whole child. Our school is built on 4 SHIPS: relationship, citizenship, leadership, and scholarship, and students are given individual attention to meet the expectations of these SHIPs. During 9th and 10th grade, students learn the skills necessary to be successful in high school, and take a majority of their Regents exams while being regularly exposed to a Common Core-aligned curriculum. In 11th and 12th grade, students concentrate on college preparatory courses to prepare them for the next stage of their life. Williamsburg Preparatory School is co-located on the Harry Van Arsdale Campus in the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn. Through hard work and dedication, we have been able to achieve both high performance and high impact with the students we serve. As a result, we have been recognized by US New and World Report, Newsweek, and the NY Post. Moreover, we have been a host school in the areas of Supportive Environment and Collaborative Teachers in the NYCDOE Learning Partners Program for the past 3 years and are participating the District/Charter Partnership program this year. Special partnerships include: The College Bound Initiative One Goal The Future Project The Greenpoint YMCA 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Williamsburg Prep is a small school with just under 700 students. As of September 2018, approximately 21% of our students have IEPs and approximately 8% are English Language Learners. In addition, many of our students are not yet proficient in math and/or ELA when they initially enroll in our school as 9th graders. For example, in our current 9th grade class 107 students scored below grade level on the Grade 8 ELA exam administered in Spring 2018. In math, 105 students received a score of 1 or 2. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. After reviewing the most recent data available and engaging in discussions with teachers, students and parents, we have determined that we continue to thrive in the framework areas of: Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers and Trust. Key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be: 2018-19 CEP 10   Rigorous Instruction - Continuing our work from 2017-2018 in providing a guaranteed and viable curriculum for all our students which is completely aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and adequately prepares our students for the rigors of higher education. Strong Family and Community Ties - increasing and improving our communication with families in order to increase student achievement and ensure that no students falls outsides the bounds of success.  2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K561 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 676 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 5 5 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 15 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 68.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.8 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 99% 84% 94.0% 25.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 115 104 1 89.4% 8.0% 18.6% 17.2% 3.0% 0.7% 4 9% 6.1 N/A N/A 98% 94% 94.7% 34% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the most recent data sources available on the Data Dashboard, Attendance and Scholarship data, and the preliminary results included in the Framework for Great Schools report, we confirmed that this element of the framework is a relative strength for our school. For example: ● During the 2017-2018 school year, our school wide graduation rate was 95.6% (School Quality Guide) ● The vast majority of students earned 10 or more credits for the 2017-2018 school year ( 9th - 94%, 10th - 86%, 11th - 87%) as measured by the School Quality Guide. ● Our school is rated as High Performing/High Impact on the 2015 and 2016 school data dashboard and among the highest scoring limited unscreened schools in NYC. Our most pressing areas of growth going forward are revealed in both the results of the 2017 annual school survey and our analysis of our Danielson Advance ratings for the school year which revealed that we still have considerable work to do in three key areas: 1. Common Core shifts in in ELA and mathematics 2. Quality of student discussion, student engagement and peer feedback 3. Use of formative assessments and effective questioning techniques Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of our continued emphasis in aligning our curriculum and assessments to the Common Core Learning Standards, there will be a 5 point increase in the average score on each of the 5 required Regents exams (ELA, Algebra, Global, US History & Living Environment) when compared to 2017-2018 results. 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Department teams will collaborate, develop and submit Curriculum maps, Unit Plans and Common Assessments for administrative review and feedback. All Academic Departments. With support, teachers will create individualized short term goals that are connected to one of the three areas of focus. Teachers will engage in regular 1:1 meetings with their assigned A.P. Prior to each meeting teachers will be observed in order to receive feedback around progress toward meeting their specified goal. This will also help to set the focus and agenda for each meeting Individualized teacher support Documents will be submitted quarterly beginning in September 2018. Regular meetings with mid-year and end-year reflection meeting School Administration along with identified Teacher Leaders. Collaboration between assistant Principals and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator sends out weekly e-mail updates and holds monthly information sessions during our PTA meetings. In addition, all students are assigned an academic coach who provides monthly feedback to parents. For example, At our back to school night in September, we will offer parent workshops to review: Common Core 2018-19 CEP 14  standards, utilizing technology, and other elements of Rigorous Instruction. Moreover, we will coordinate with our PTA to schedule similar learning opportunities for families throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have conducted a School Based Option to allow for weekly faculty and department meetings. In addition, resources have been allocated to provide teachers with opportunities to receive high-quality PD in our focus areas.For example, we have allocated $6,000.00 to focus on Culturally Responsive teaching. In addition, we are engaging a Math Consultant from Generation-Ready to provide 6 days of coaching for our Algebra teachers as we contemplate the shifts required as an Algebra for All school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, All teachers in the core academic areas will have administered and analyzed both an interim assessment (December 2018) and mid-term exam (January 2019) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will review our the data generated from the assessments discussed in Part A above along with classroom scholarship data for Q1 and Q2. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After reviewing the most recent data sources available, including the preliminary results from our 2015 Quality Review, the 2017 School Quality Guide, Attendance and Scholarship data, and the results from the 2017 annual school survey, we confirmed that this element of the framework is a relative strength for our school. For example: ● During the 2017-2018 school year, our schools’ suspension rate and incident levels fell to historically low levels. ● On the 2018 School Survey, 76% of students agreed/strongly agreed that discipline in the school is handled fairly. Our most pressing areas of growth remains improving our schools advisory model to improve school/family communication and the timely monitoring of student achievement and when necessary, to provide effective interventions targeted to specific areas of growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the % of 9th, 10th and 11th grade students from the lowest third who accumulate 10 credits will increase by 3% from 2018 levels as measured by the annual school quality guide. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? By September 2018, all students will be placed into advisory groups. All students September 2018 - June 2019 Grade teams will meet weekly throughout the academic year to identify students at risk of falling outside the sphere of success. Academic Advisers will communicate quarterly with families to share progress and highlight - if necessary - areas of concern. All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 All Teachers Quarterly School Administration, Guidance Staff and Grade Team Leaders Grade Teams and Guidance Staff Advisers with Administrative support. Grade Teams beginning in September 2018. Monthly beginning in September 2018 Grade Teams will identify students each month to recognize in the areas of: Leadership. Scholarship, Relationship and Citizenship. All Grade Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We send out weekly e-mail updates and hold monthly information sessions during our PTA meetings. In addition, we will provide workshops throughout the school year to support families in understanding and appreciating the importance of a supportive environment and academic success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Grade team initiatives include: Summer Bridge Program (80 hours per-session) grade-level tutoring (400 hours per session) 2018-19 CEP 17  After school clubs (500 hours per-session) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will have participated in advisory meetings and an analysis of student credit accumulation data from semester 1 will have been undertaken to target students who require additional support and increased outreach. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review student scholarship rates after each quarter to identify students at risk for not achieving the required credits. In addition, we will identify potentially at risk students at our weekly grade team and Pupil Personnel Team meetings so we can provide timely interventions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the most recent data sources available, including the results from the 2017 Student Perception survey, the 2018 School Quality Guide, Attendance and Scholarship data, and reviewing the feedback from our last QR, we confirmed that this element of the framework is a relative strength for our school. For example: ● During the 2014-2015 school year, we received a well-developed rating for this metric on the annual Quality Review. Our most pressing areas of growth going forward are revealed in the Preliminary Framework for Great Schools report in the area of Quality of Professional Development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of teacher collaboration in grade level and department teams, there will be a 5% increase from 2018 level of performance in the areas of classroom engagement, and teacher-student relationships as measured on the Student Perception survey 2018 levels. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers will be assigned to Grade level and Departmental Teams. Teachers September 2018 Administration Teacher teams will meet weekly to monitor student progress and highlight effective strategies (Collaborative planning/ lesson Study) to improve teacher practice. Teachers All teachers will meet 2 x a month with designated AP to provide detailed feedback regarding teacher improvement Administration, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 All teachers will be observed and receive written feedback a minimum of 4 times throughout the school year. Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Teacher Leaders Administration Teachers Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We send out weekly e-mail updates and hold monthly information sessions during our PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds are utilized to fund teacher, Guidance, and Administrative staff and provide for tutoring. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of Teacher Learning Teams, Inquiry Committees and Grade Level Teams will submit reflective analysis of work to date with successes and actionable next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting minutes and Teacher self-reflections. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our analysis of the 2018 School Survey (92% positive responses) and the 2015 Framework for Great Schools report (Exceeding standards) along with the data used to calculate the 2016 PPR, we have determined that this area of the Framework is a relative strength for our school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the % of teachers who agree/strongly agree that their PD experiences are sustained and coherent will increase by 8% over 2018 levels (72%) as measured by the Annual School survey. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Administration and School Leadership team will engage in regular meetings to track academic progress, participate in instructional planning, monitor program coherence and expand teacher influence in decision making. Department Teams, Grade Teams September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Administration, Teacher Leaders The Administration will distribute a Teacher Handbook outlining vision and expectations for all staff. The Administration will facilitate regular Faculty meetings to outline expectations, engage in data review and share best practices. All staff All staff September 2018 Administration Administration September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We send out weekly e-mail updates and hold monthly information sessions during our PTA meetings. In addition, we will provide workshops throughout the year at Parent conferences and PTA meetings to help promote parent leadership and make specific connections how families can support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds are utilized to fund teachers (45) Guidance (2), and Administrative staff (4) and support staff (5). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Teachers and Parents will be surveyed to receive feedback regarding initiatives associated with this element of the Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher surveys and Focus groups. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After reviewing the most recent data sources available, including the preliminary results from the 2018 School Quality Guide, Attendance and Scholarship data, and the preliminary results included in the Framework for Great Schools report and annual School Survey, we confirmed that this is the area in which we have the most room to improve in spite of the efforts we have made in the past. Specifically, we will seek to improve our communication and outreach with families as these are areas specifically targeted in the Framework for Great Schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of increased reporting of student progress and clear expectations for parental outreach, we will see a 5% increase in parent attendance at our monthly parent meetings and a 20% increase at our semi-annual parent-teacher conferences from 2017-2018 levels. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Creation of a weekly email newsletter for parents to update them on events at the school Parent community Moving our parent outreach time to the morning, to allow for more parents to attend meetings with their child’s adviser early in the morning Advises’ parents Formalize celebrating our students and families by inviting all honor roll, Principal's list, ‘Ship winners and most improved students’ parents to PTA meetings to receive an award and a t-shirt. Families of recognized students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Weekly from November to June Weekly from Sept to June Quarterly Administrative team will oversee newsletter; Parent Coordinator will maintain email list Advisers Parent Coordinator in coordination with administrative team If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds are utilised to improve communication with families: JupiterGrades $5,000.00 Blackboard Connect $2,500.00 Postage $20,000.00. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of parents will utilize Jupiter Grades stay informed regarding their child's academic progress as measured by monthly usage/log-in data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. % of parents regularly utilizing Jupiter Grades to monitor progress and/or communicate with school staff. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have not passed or achieved a college ready score inELAor who scored a level 1 on the Grade 8 ELAassessment. Students who have not passed or achieved a college ready score inMath or who scored a level 1 on the Grade 8 Math assessment Students who have not passed or achieved a college ready score inScience Students who have previously taken and failed Global and/or US History Regents Students recommended for peer support Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) In Grades 9 and 10 students receive an additional period of ELAinstruction each school day. Guided practice and math fluency drills. Intensive Writing and vocabulary review including, when appropriate, small group tutoring and targeted pull outs. Tutoring Guided practice and targetedreading/writing skills Tutoring Intensive Writing and subject specific vocabulary review Tutoring Academic mentoring Weekly meetings with matched student mentor along with regular meetings with Guidance staff. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After-school, lunchtime and Saturday tutoring After-school, lunchtime and Saturday tutoring After-school, lunchtime and Saturday tutoring After-school, lunchtime and Saturday tutoring Weekly during lunch tutoring and after school social activities 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of September 2018, we have 8 students who fit into this category. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We hold quarterly meetings to review the needs and progress of these students and determine initiatives to support their achievement. In addition, basic supplies, clothing are purchased to support this vulnerable population. Moreover, each of the students are assigned an advisor and invited to utilize the services of our counseling center and school health center. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). As of September 2018, we have 8 students in this category. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 29 We purchase basic academic supplies and clothing with these funds and distribute as needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 CEP 30  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All current teachers are highly qualified and our hiring and PD Committee will work to support that all staff remain up to date and implement effective strategies to assist all of our students In addition, we canvas extensively and seek to hire the best available candidates possible. As part of our process, all teachers participate in phone interviews, group panel interviews and demonstration lessons. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers participate in weekly PD with their assigned Teacher Teams. In addition, our Para-professionals engage in PD provided the FSC. Finally, our Principal participates in PD provided by the NYC Leadership Academy. In order to differentiate our PD, we utilize sessions offered by the Brooklyn North FSC and monthly sessions conducted from staff at our Superintendent's office. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A school wide committee was selected by their peers to offer guidance in choosing assessments. In addition, we have adopted a school-wide grading policy. Finally, all of our teachers engage in regular departmental reviews of teacher created assessments and analysis of achievement data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x na na na x Column B Section Reference(s) 1,2,3,4,5 na na na 1,2,3,4,5 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 472,345.00 na na na 3,656,514.00 1Explanation/Background: 2018-19 CEP 32  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 CEP 33  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Williamsburg Preparatory School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Williamsburg Preparatory School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 35  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 CEP 36  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Williamsburg Preparatory School,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 CEP 37  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 CEP 38 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 2018-19 CEP 39  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 40 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 41 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: rationale: to ensure our lowest beginners to our most advanced ELLs&nbsp;who are in Begin description here: · AP classes all have the supports they need to succeed in our school and beyond. It is our hope all ENL students can have ample preparation&nbsp;via curriculum, AIS, college counseling, and family education to apply and attend 2-4 year schools of their choice. · 9th grade, Beg, Int, Advanced, Former 10th grade, Beg, Int, Advanced, Former 11th, Beg, Int, Advanced, Former 12th, Beg, Int, Advanced, Former · according to mandated minutes and content&nbsp;need. All ENL students also receive&nbsp;an ENL certified&nbsp;teacher as their adviser. This adviser&nbsp;is also a liaison&nbsp;between the school and the home and provided written and verbal materials in HL if necessary. Advisers&nbsp;have frequent check ins&nbsp;before&nbsp;school and lunch periods. ENL teachers also have AIS&nbsp;after school or during tutor time at lunch. · · content licenses in Social Studies, Math, Science and SPED · language of instruction # and types of certified teachers: We have 4 certified ENL teachers. 2 of those also have schedule and duration: September to June full programming with ENL supports types of materials: We modify all our materials for ENL students in house. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: · content&nbsp;area teachers should have the skills to make content comprehensible for our ENL students.&nbsp; · deliver not only pedagogical&nbsp;professional development but also receive&nbsp;anecdotal&nbsp;information about their ESL&nbsp;students. This 'humanizing' behind the scenes always teachers to understand what it is like to be an ESL&nbsp;student in their classroom. An example would be a Yemeni female feeling to scared to ask their ELA&nbsp;teacher to move her seat away from another Yemeni male (forbidden in her culture)so they went to their advocate , their ESL&nbsp;teacher. The ESL&nbsp;teacher made it a teachable moment for both the student to learn to speak to her teacher about her culture, as well rationale: All teachers are ENL teachers. All students are our students. We believe all teachers to receive training: our teachers go to weekly meetings where ENL teachers 2018-19 CEP 42  schedule and duration: Weekly meetings in depts&nbsp;(smaller) and then larger Part C: Professional Development as the teacher to learn about our Yemeni population and their needs. Not all professional development is learning strategies, alot of it is cultural and social.&nbsp; · professional&nbsp;developments throughout the year *roughly 5) · ESL&nbsp;portfolios and tracking of AP students. · topics to be covered: Cultural Competency, Family Engagement , ESL voices, name of provider: Lauren Giunta, Kelly Witowski rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: · rationale: All parents should have a roadmap&nbsp;for their child's education regardless of language, economic, or class barriers. Our school openly engages with ENL parents using the advisory system, as well as college office and guidance and PTA. We hope to get at least 2 ESL&nbsp;parents on PTA&nbsp; a year.&nbsp; · notifications on phone through jupitergrades, We also have more formalized events throughout the year. vis a vis&nbsp;PTC&nbsp;3 times a year, open house and our ship breakfasts.&nbsp; · attendance.&nbsp; · · and letters home name of provider: Whole staff. how parents will be notified of these activities: We use phone calls (set up in HL), email topics to be covered: students growth and progress, financial aid/college, grades and schedule and duration: frequently. Parent contact is made daily if parents have Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2018-19 CEP 43  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2. 3. 4. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Williamsburg Preparatory School Borough Brooklyn School Number 561 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michael Shadrick Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Giunta Teacher/Subject Area Juliet Varnedoe/English Teacher/Subject Area Andrew Kearney/Math Related-Service Provider Christie Clarke/Speech Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Joe Termini Coach NA School Counselor Eileen Bell Parent Glendaly Toro Parent Coordinator Lisa Staszewski Field Support Center Staff Member ? Other (Name and Title) Kelly Witkowski/Dean C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 702 2018-19 CEP 45 Total number of ELLs 39 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.56%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 3 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell and teacher created assessments are used to guide instructional decisions and program offereings. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our current assessment tools are created in house utilizing collaboration of the ESL coordinator, ELA teachers and bilingual staff if applicable. This information can help set an instructional plan for content teachers. We utilize texts, passages and math diagnostics of several levels as part of our intake process to assess literacy. Mock NYSESLAT. Ongoing assessments of students in academic content areas as well as language development inform teaching and learning. Collecting and analyzing mutiple data sources in and setting annual measurable goals help improve areas that most impact teaching and learning, and assessment for ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 46  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our speech teacher Ms. Clarke can use BADER to test their literacy levels. We are able to determine literacy in English or Spanish using BADER. We also hold student conferences weekly, oral questioning, exit slips and reciprocal teaching. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our current assessment tool for baseline/benchmark assessments is ELL Periodic Assessment. Including informal checks for understanding embedded in classroom practice and benchmark assessments that help us understand the progress students have made in order to thoughtfully plan units throughout the year 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] ENL teacher along with content area teachers anaylize the data and make adjustments to the daily lesson plans to ensure students are reaching their goals 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELA, Global History and Living Environment Regents. We also review student achievement on RLAT and monitor credit accumulation to drive instructional decisions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After reviewing the data from the NYSESLAT exam and Regents exams we make determinations on what services need to be added to support ELLs. This helps us determine student schedules and programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Not sure what to include for this. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated instructional minutes drive the ENL teachers program. We analyze the minute structure for each student in each grade, then place them together in a class. Once placed in the class, the instructional minutes time may differ therefore an individualized program will be created for the students. We program all of our ENL students into STARS. We cross reference NYSESLAT score with our teacher programs 2018-19 CEP 47  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in all our classrooms, therefore each ENL is learning Common Core standards within the block period of time. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs take all tests in English, with mandated accomodations and modifications. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentaite instruction according to the students mandates and needs. The ENL teacher has portfolios and evaluation cover sheets for all students as evidence of learning. Our ELL students are grouped by profiency levels, instruction is focused on what modality the students have the lowest NYESLAT scale score. Many newcomer ELLs in Williamsburg Prep have a stronger focus on vocabulary and basic grammer in an effort to build skills to lead them to higher ordered thinking and writing. Many developing ELLs have a strong focus on writing and essay organization. Former ELLs have much of their ENL instruction based around subject content. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWD's use reciprocal teaching, literature circles and Socratic Seminars to provide academic content delievery and to assist in English Language development. The ENL teacher ensures students are reciveing all mandated ENL units and that their IEP accomodations are met and helpful in access the English language. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our instructional focus for the ELLs-SWD students provide rigouros instruction in content areas. The ICT teacher uses formative instruction throughout the daily lessons to track that the IEP goals are being attained. Our push in model will allow the ENL teacher to scaffold the material so the students understand the content. We use the same model for our lower performing students. Each year our goal is to meet the needs of the diverse learners. Our tight knit family enviroment allows for daily check ins with our students by the ENL teacher. All students, including are ELLs are placed in the correct ICT classes when the students schedules are formulated. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program includes small groups of students who are identified through benchmark instruction or teacher assessments. Teachers build individualized instruction plans for these students. Modified material is utilized to assist the students in understanding the curriculum. The differentaed instruction is also tailored by these assessments and strategies are infused in our daily lessons to promote success. The teachers carefully monitors the targeted groups by conferencing and formative assessments. Our targeted students also receive lunch time individual instructon and peer tutoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have decided to implement Read 180 to help support our ELLs in reading comprehension. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 2018-19 CEP 48  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Williamsburg Prep believes in order for ELL's to meet the high standards set for all students and to equally participate in NYC DOE literacy, mathematics, and other core subject initives, it is imperative that each student have access to coherent programs that are uniformly delived throught our school, as well as rigorous instruction. All students regardless of race, language orability are welcomed to participate in all during and after school activities 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Read 180 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs have access to bilingual and English dictonaries, libraries in the home language, and electronic word translators. We also use versions of tests in the students home language (when necessary). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher reviews all documentation well in advance to ensure all required services are met. The SLT team works with the ENL teacher to review and analyze all documentation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The 3 schools on campus meet frequently to make sure that all students, including ELLs, have the supports needed to experience academic success. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teacher, parent coordinator and guidance deparment work together to create a packet of information which is then translated to the student's home language and distrubited to the families. They are also invited to participate in our monthly PTA meetings and Saturday new parent focus groups. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 CEP 49  The ENL teachers actively participates in our research based proffessional learning times on Thursdays where scaffolds for our ELLs are included in our agendas. In addition they particpate in city-wide ENL workshops. They continue to attend outside ENL workshops to stregthen their work for our students 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher activley participates in our professional learning sesssions on Thursdays. The research based learning is divided by core subject area or grade. In addition to NYCDOE workshops, The ENL teacher participates in district wide proffessional learning activities when applicable. Williamsburg Prep adheres to all the PD regulations from CR Part 154. WP provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minumum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquistion, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and intergrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minumium of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development for co-teaching strategies and intergrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teachers keeps all copies of PD agendas, and a copy is placed in her folder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We host three ENL meetings for our parents. In September our S.I.T team meets with all the ENL parents. The ENL teacher hosts individual meetings as well. In February, we host a mid year check-in meeting to ensure all goals are being met. If translation services are needed to utilize our dual language staff members to translate. If we are not able to provide the service, we use the translations and interpretation unit. We will be collaborating with our district staff to offer additional parent meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Three ENL meetings per year Sept Jan and May always invited to all meetings . Second benchmark in February. All materials sent home are translated for parents. To ensure parent involvement, PTA meeting are also translated. ALL ENL parents are invited to a ENL focus brunch annually to answer any/all questions and also to get more involved in school activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2018-19 CEP 50  2018-19 CEP 51 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael Shadrick, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 52  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Williamsburg Preparatory Schoo School DBN: 14K561 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael Shadrick Title Principal Joe Termini Assistant Principal Lisa Staszewski Parent Coordinator Lauren Giunta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Glendaly Toro Parent Juliet Varnedoe/English Teacher/Subject Area Andrew Kearney/Math Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Eileen Bell Karen Watts ??? Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ??? Christie Clarke Other Speech Teacher Kelly Witkowski Other Dean/ELL Teacher NA Other ??? Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 53  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14k561 School Name: WilliamsburgPreparatorySchool Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Lauren Kelly Giunta` ESL coordinator Yes Witowski Assistant Principal Yes No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school.  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Our Parent Coordinator gives 100% of new admits the HLIS in their preferred language..they can point to their language on the signage if they can not verbally communicate it. If the parents are dominant in a language other then English it is chosen on the spot and input into our system (ATS and Jupiter Grades)  The ATS report will then state the HL  Our Jupiter Grades system will also have the HL documented so all texts, emails, and paper communication is sent out in their preferred language automatically.  Emergency Blue Cards are updated w preferred languages 2018-19 CEP 54   This data about language is used to inform our surveys which are available in many languages 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Arabic Polish Spanish 12% English English 2% 0% Spanish Arabic Polish 5% 2% 0% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families PTC announcements 4 times a year Open House 1 time a year Promotion in Doubt 1-3 times a year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All teachers have template letters provided by Ms. Giunta in the following languages: Sp, Arabic, Polish, French. All template letters are disseminated via email and can be accessed on a cloud and edited for all. All teachers have template letters provided by Ms. Giunta in the following languages: Sp, Arabic, Polish, French. All template letters are disseminated via email and can be accessed on a cloud and edited for all Counselors create the letters using translation services. 2018-19 CEP 55  Sports, Extra curricular activity announcements invitations, trip slips Very Frequent throughout year. Teachers, coaches, counselors and advisers create the letters using translation services or more simple google translate if a very simple announcement. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher conferences 4 times a year IEP Meetings On a rolling needs basis College Night Meetings Approx 4-5 a year Curriculum Night/Open House 2-3 times a year. interpretation service(s)? We have several trained translators in our school. Many of our staff are bilingual and sit in on those meetings. Our staff speaks the following languages: Spanish, Chinese, Hindi, Polish, French, Russian, Arabic The special ed team uses a translator or translation services on speaker phone if needed. Our school psychologist is also fluent in Spanish, as well as our counselors, and many teachers. We have a full time Spanish speaking counselor for the Spanish speaking families. Any students with a low incidence language, like Chinese, or French-Creole we can hire a translator using our budget. We have several trained translators in our school. Many of our staff are bilingual and sit in on those meetings. Our staff speaks the following languages: Spanish, Chinese, Hindi, Polish, French, Russian, Arabic 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Most of our parents speak Spanish, Polish, Arabic with Spanish being an overwhelming dominant language. We have several staff members who can communicate in Spanish, Polish and Arabic. We just call them in their classroom or cell phone and have them translate. We can also use translation services if there is a low incidence language. 2018-19 CEP 56  We also have a "robo call" system available in most languages. We can create an announcement in any language and have it sent home in the evening. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All school members will be made aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 because we will review the resources in small meetings. Our staff meets in depts and grade teams several times a week. We will have our translation team turnkey resources that can meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  Translated signage:always posted near elevators, stairwells, entryways where parents frequent. We also have signage near Parent Coordinator so they can point to their language should we not speak it.  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents: Are always transcribed, interpreted in the preferred home language.,  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..): all emails, letters home, and phone calls are made by WP staff using the preferred home language to ensure not English Dominant families receive the same information in the timely manner they deserve. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our counselors, advisers, and our translation person Ms. Giunta keeps the lines of communication open with parents. We monitor feedback of limited English proficient families using surveys, face to face meetings a few times a year. There are several times staff speaks to families in a given month and in some cases weekly. We implement feedback from families by discussing with staff members if there is a void that could be filled with better translation services. Technology enables us to act in an immediate and efficient way to remedy any gaps in communication. 2018-19 CEP 57 
