2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K562 School Name: EVERGREEN MIDDLE SCHOOL FOR URBAN EXPLORATION Principal: LAUREN REISS 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Evergreen Middle School for Urban Exploration 333200010562 6, 7, 8 125 Covert Street, Brooklyn, NY 11207 School Number (DBN): 32K562 718-4550180 Phone Number: 708-455-4381 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Lauren Reiss lreiss@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Lauren Reiss Erin Oates Luz Molina Lauren Reiss Jasmine Diaz N/A N/A Cameron Burrell District Information ShielaGorski Superintendent: 797 Bushwick Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: sgorksi@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-574-1100 Phone Number: 718-574-1245 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 501, Brooklyn, NY 11220 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lauren Reiss Clayton Rocco Luz Molina Rosario Vega Jasmine Diaz n/a n/a Linda Sariahmed Megan Kennelly IthleynTorres *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent 2018-19 CEP 5  Glenda Torres n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At Evergreen Middle School for Urban Exploration, we commit to nurturing independent thinkers, self-advocates, risk-takers, urban explorers, inventors, creative thinkers and leaders through engagement in authentic learning experiences. We work collaboratively with families and the community to foster the growth of our children - academically, socially, emotionally and cognitively. Our purpose is to promote authentic cultural, economic, and 2018-19 CEP 9  inquiry-based exploration of our neighborhood and beyond in order to encourage success for all students while fostering bilingualism and bi-literacy. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. A small community school, Evergreen Middle School for Urban Exploration (EMS), is experiencing an increase in 6th grade enrollment, with the highest numbers we have seen since the school opened it's doors in 2012, and is excited to offer the first middle school Spanish dual language program in district 32 in the 2018-2019 school year. EMS is a collaborative community whose positive, nurturing culture can be felt the moment one enters the building. We are a safe haven for our students and families. We offer consistency and a staff that strives to meet students' academic and social-emotional needs. Simply put, we are a family. EMS is exceptionally proud to be a Showcase Schools host for the 2018-2019 school year. We welcome the opportunity to highlight promising practices around student engagement and our partnership with Edible Schoolyards. Visiting schools will have an opportunity to see students engaging in cognitively demanding tasks and making curricular connections to our green room and school garden. Through a farm-to-table experiential education model, our students are learning how choosing to grow and cook sustainable, organic food can transform their health and the health of our planet. Students and parents have the opportunity to grow and cultivate a beautiful garden, and kitchen classrooms enable our students and their families to cook the food that they grow and take their health future into their own hands. Ever-environmentally-conscious-Evergreen also has partnered with West Elm, to build a rain harvest/water catchment system in our garden. In the upcoming school year, West Elm will return to build benches for our garden. Million Trees NYC, a citywide, public-private program with an ambitious goal: to plant and care for one million new trees across the City's five boroughs over the next decade. We are proud of our partnership with the NYC Department of Education's Office of Teacher Recruitment. We are preparing to meet our fourth cohort of "Partner Teachers" this fall. Our teachers have trained three prior cohorts of both Teaching Fellows as well as NYC Teaching Collaborative recruits. This partnership has allowed our teachers to continue to develop their ability to identify and create strong teaching practices. It also encourages our teachers to engage in real-time coaching and mentoring, an important leadership skill. In addition, it provides our school with a pipeline of new teachers who we have trained and supported should one of our teachers leave. EMS maintains consistently high retention rates, with little to no teacher turn-over. Our Champs program affords students the opportunity to come to school early and play basketball, flag football, volleyball and other team sports under the supervision of our physical education teachers. We also offer a host of enrichment activities including, cheer leading, male and female basketball teams, jewelry club, theater, Green Team, chorus, visual arts, entrepreneurship opportunities. In terms of special academic programs, we are excited to strengthen and refine our Strategic Reading program through our new partnership with The Middle school Quality Initiative (MSQI). Based on students’ reading level data, the school leaders will again program 25 teachers to instruct small reading intervention groups for three class periods a week (called Strategic Reading). All students receive intensive literacy supports in homogeneous reading groups during first period on, Wednesday, and Thursday and Friday. The school has trained staff or released staff for professional development on Phonics, Wilson Reading Program, Leveled Literacy Intervention, and Achieve3000. Through strategic planning, professional learning, and coaching support from MSQI we look forward to seeing more student reading growth. 2018-19 CEP 10  An additional program that we are proud to of is being awarded a Facing History and Ourselves grant. Through this grant, teachers will participate in ongoing professional development and planning to increase student engagement and achievement through an innovative approach to civics, social studies, humanities, and language arts education. In 2018-2019 we are entering our second year of our Strategic Math Program. As with Strategic Reading, students are grouped homogeneously based on multiple math assessments. Students receive small group mathematics instructions on Mondays and Tuesdays of each week. As a newly identified Computer Science for All school, all students will receive a meaningful, high‐quality computer science education. Students will learn computational thinking, problem solving, creativity, critical thinking, collaboration, and to communicate and create with technologies. Through our work, students will be better prepared to utilize computer science after graduation. We have also been accepted into the 2018-19 Specialized High School Admissions Test (SHSAT) School Day Administration pilot. The SHSAT School Day administration pilot is part of a menu of initiatives that aim to increase access and diversity at eight of the Specialized High Schools. As an SHSAT School Day school, we will have the opportunity to administer the SHSAT to our 8th graders in the fall of 2018. In addition, 7th graders receive test-prep support, and our teachers receive professional development support and resources for engaging with our students and families. This year we have been the recipient of a new band through Vans Gives a Band Music Fund. In addition to a band's worth of instruments, we were rewarded a $10,000 grant which we will use to fund our music program. Our Model Teacher Team is a team of teacher leaders that has established their classrooms as laboratories where they experiment with best pedagogical practices and welcome colleagues to visit and learn. They provide coaching support and work to build shared knowledge among all teachers. Additionally, our Model Teacher Team leads professional development and peer inter-visitation around our school's instructional focus. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Evergreen Middle School serves a population with high numbers of students with disabilities (26%), English as a New Language (23%), and (20%) students in temporary housing. The incoming 6th grade students come to our school starting far below grade level in both ELA and Math; 2012 – 2013: 97 % Level 1 & 2 in ELA, 98 % Level 1 & 2 in Math 2013 – 2014: 98% Level 1 & 2 in ELA, 97 % Level 1 & 2 in Math 2014 – 2015: 96% Level 1 & 2 in ELA, 98 % Level 1 & 2 in Math 2015 - 2016: 92% Level 1 & 2 in ELA, 99% Level 1 & 2 in Math 2018-19 CEP 11  2016 – 2017: 95% Level 1 &2 in ELA, 89% Level 1 & 2 in Math In addition, our students are struggling readers. They also do not come in with solid foundational skills in mathematics. Many of our ENL students are not proficient in their home language which impedes their progress in learning English. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. EMS was very excited to receive the 207-18 Framework for Great Schools Report. Our NY City School Survey Measures indicated that we outperformed the city as well as the district average in 32/33 Categories on the Survey. Survey highlights include: Rigorous Instruction: EMS' score was a 4.06 which was .25 points higher than the District average and .41 points higher than the City average. Collaborative Teachers: EMS' score was a 3.97 which was .01 points higher than the District average and .29 points higher than the City average. Effective School Leadership: EMS' score was a 4.33 which was .48 points higher than the District average and .74 points higher than the City average. Trust: EMS' score was a 4.62 which was .74 points higher than the District average and 1.02 points higher than the City average. Key Focus 2018-2019 Students will have opportunities to participate in cognitively engaging and authentic learning tasks in all classes to develop their critical thinking skills. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K562 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 342 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 17 17 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 89.2% % Reduced Lunch 17.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 72.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.33 3% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 43 43 13 94.8% 0.9% 25.1% 24.9% 0.3% 0.0% 2 63% 5.3 15.6% 35% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths ELA  All ELA Teachers are receiving professional development during the summer of 2018 in order to learn about the new NYCDOE Writing Curriculum which is aligned to the CCLS and the Next Generation Learning Standards.  We are excited to strengthen and refine our Strategic Reading program through our new partnership with The Middle school Quality Initiative (MSQI). Based on students’ reading level data, the school leaders will again program 25 teachers to instruct small reading intervention groups for three class periods a week (called Strategic Reading). All students receive intensive literacy supports in homogeneous reading groups during first period on, Wednesday, and Thursday and Friday. The school has trained staff or released staff for professional development on Phonics, Wilson Reading Program, Leveled Literacy Intervention, and Achieve3000. Through strategic planning, professional learning, and coaching support from MSQI we look forward to seeing more student reading growth.  All content areas have vertical and horizontal collaborative meeting time to ensure quality implementation of curricula. Content area meeting run with administrative support.  Professional development and pedagogical support are provided to teachers to make sure that the curricula  is appropriately scaffolded to meet the needs of all students. In all content and grade areas, we utilize pacing calendars, curriculum maps, unit and lesson plans to scaffold skills and content for all groups of students MATH  We developed a partnership with National Training Network (NTN) whose mission is to build a nation of mathematically sound thinkers who have deep conceptual understanding through the provision of high quality math professional development to educators. NTN partners with school leaders to create a comprehensive personalized plan to improve mathematics instruction utilizing the following 7 levels of 2018-19 CEP 14  professional development - Teacher Training, Curriculum Planning, Job Embedded Coaching, Data Analysis, Professional Learning Communities, PD On - Demand and Leadership Academies.  Across all classrooms, students are using proven methodologies including the SOLVE Strategy ( Study the problem; Organize the Facts, Line up a plan, Verify the plan with action and Examine your answer) to build fluency and engage in high levels of conceptual understanding.  All of our teachers are part of Algebra for ALL which provides teachers and school leaders with ongoing research-based professional learning for two years to strengthen their capacity to improve the mathematics programs of their schools and support student readiness for success in Common Core mathematics in middle school, Algebra 1, and beyond. Professional learning opportunities for teachers will be designed to deepen and sharpen their content knowledge and pedagogical repertoire, and to engage them in conversations around grade-specific mathematics with a focus on the significant topics in each grade and making them more accessible to students.  All 8th Grade students took the Algebra Regents  Two of our teachers were accepted to the Bank Street Leadership Program in Mathematics through the  Algebra for All Program. Schoolwide data tracking system using the Mastery Connect platform whereby teachers uploaded common assessments and tracked student mastery of the CCLS. Needs ELA  Consistency across the department in terms of Standards based Data tracking   Increased focus on Academic Vocabulary Focus on 7th grade curriciulum and pedagogy with on-going PD and support MATH  More practice around conceptual understanding of word problems.  Additional Professional development  Consistency across the department in terms of Standards based Data tracking Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 15  By June 2019, through the continued implementation of Strategic Math, and with the support of the National Training Network and Algebra for All, the percentage of students achieving a level 3 or 4 on the New York State Mathematics Test will increase 5%. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Math Curriculum: All grades will use the CCLS/Next Generation Aligned Curriculum. Grades 6 & 7 will continue to use the Engage Curriculum. Grade 8 with use the Big Ideas Curriculum ELA Curriculum: All grades will use CCLS Aligned Curriculum including Expeditionary Learning and the NYCDOE Writing Curriculum. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. - June Ms. Reiss, Principal Mr. Brown, AP (Math) NTN Math Coaches Teacher teams, Model Teachers Conduct professional development for math intervention programs All staff Sept. Ms. Reiss, Principal Conduct baseline mathematics standardized testing for all students (Performance Series), grouping students in strategic Math classes based on levels Provide professional development within Math Department meetings on unpacking the NGLS Standards for Unit Plans, including Unit Assessments All students Sept. NTN Math Coaches MSQI Coach All Math Teachers, Mr. Brown Math and Sept.- Oct. Coaches: NTN, Math AP Brown Content Department meetings model and norm Benchmark Assessment scoring with NGLS-aligned rubrics Math Team Sept.-Oct. Coaches: Provide ongoing all-staff professional development cycles around Making Thinking Visible to support students' cognitive engagement, critical thinking, and student-centered learning. NTN, Math Brown, AP Math Team Sept. - June Ms. Reiss, Principal Mr. Brown, AP NTN Math Coaches Math Teachers 2018-19 CEP 17  Provide all-staff professional development cycle to model and norm analysis of student work Math Team Sept. Content team data analysis of target students in team meetings Math Team Oct.-June Coaches and Content Math Team Leaders Brown Coaches and Content Team Leader AP Brown Reassess students in all math classes for regrouping of math intervention All students Dec-Jan. Math Teachers Targeted informal teacher evaluations for monitoring use of assessment and data; face-to-face post-observation feedback sessions Math Team, Sept. - June. Ms. Reiss, Principal Mr. Brown, AP Ever-PREP Academies- Data driven instruction based on assessments (NYCPT, Performance Series, end of unit tests) All students Sept.-June Ms. Reiss, Principal Math: Think Through Math, EngageNY, Algebra 1 and Strategic Math Mr. Brown, AP Select teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our School will host a series of parent events and curriculum nights to support their understanding of the common core. The events will be held in September, November, February and March. Our Parent Coordinator as well as the teachers will be the key personnel responsible. In addition, parents will be invited to shadow their students several times a year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This goal is largely dependent on human resources and access to technology. We are using Title I SWP funding to pay for the consultants. MSQI provides us with some funding to support PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 2018-19 CEP 18  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teachers will regularly use standards-aligned assessments to create instructional groupings and monitor progress towards mastery of standards.  By the end of every month administrators will monitor the development and utilization of CCLS-aligned assessments using minutes from Department Team and Grade Team Meetings.  By January 2019, as measured by the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments conducted within Strategic Reading groups, 10% of students will increase at least one reading level.  By January 2019, 10% of students will improve their scores by at least 5% on the Performance Series math assessments.  Weekly Word Generation Assessment monitoring Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NY State Exams, Science Performance Exam, Algebra Regents, Living Environment Regents, Performance Series, New York City Performance Tasks (NYCPT), Degrees of Reading Power (DRP), Fountas & Pinnell (F&P), and classroom formative and summative standards-aligned assessments, I Ready Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths 1. The 2018-19 PPO Feedback states, " 2. Consistent schoolwide systems support clear expectations for all students, setting them up for success. 3. Beacon after school program provides wrap around student services and has an on site social worker as a resource for students. 4. Maintained our partnership with the Mobile Crisis Unit. 5. We have a school-wide Behavioral Incentive Program. 6. All staff trained by Jarred Fox in LGBTQ best practices 7. Strategic Reading and Math programs enable students to receive individualized support/enrichment meeting the needs of every student Needs Increase in student voice for all sub-groups via - Student Government, peer mediation, etc... 1. 2. Supporting the school community in understanding the tenants of Dual Language and bi-literacy including for those not in the program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students will report feeling safe in our school building on the NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct a professional learning series (PD Cycle A) for identifying students in crisis, mandated reporting, and addressing bullying in the classroom All staff Oct.-Nov. 2018-19 Guidance Deans Conduct a professional learning series (PD Cycle A) for supporting SWDs and ENLs All staff Oct.-Nov.2018-19 ENL Dept and SPED Dept Teachers Conduct a professional learning series (PD Cycle B) for Mandated Reporting and Suicide Prevention All staff Nov.-Jan. Guidance 2018-19 Conduct a professional learning series (PD Cycle B) for Cultural Responsiveness and Anti-Bullying All staff Nov.-Jan. Select Teachers Select Teachers Discuss impact of trainings during Grade Team meetings on a weekly basis as a component of ongoing qualitative data collection Analyze PBIS data during Grade Team meetings at the end of each PD Cycle as a component of ongoing quantitative data collection 2018-19 Guest Speakers Grade Teams Oct-June Admin 2018-19 Grade Team Leaders Data Team Teachers Grade Teams Nov.-June Admin Grade Team Leaders Data Team Teachers Admin Dean Conduct a student survey about bullying, safety and overall school environment 4 times a year All students November, February, April, June Hire an a part time guidance counselor to run groups on bullying. All Students Sept-June P/T Guidance 2018-19 CEP 21  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have the Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Counselor conduct multiple trainings on this. One will be in September, one in January and one in March. We will review our school-wide behavior system, the DOE Code of Conduct, and conflict resolution. We will also allow parents to attend our After school academic program with their students. The key personnel include, Guidance Counselor, P/T Guidance, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, and admin. This will be a year-long project. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Admin and teachers creating lessons for advisory; Brooklyn Borough North PD for De-escalation; schedule adjustments. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 90% of students will report feeling safe as measured by the school-wide survey, one of four surveys to be administered throughout the year (November, February, April, and June). By the end of February 2019, at least 95% of teachers will review the survey data within grade team meetings to discuss the impact of trainings and the professional development series, with the intent of reformulating the action plan as needed to address students' perceptions of school safety. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Paper/pen survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Tenet 4: Teachers engage in strategic practices and decision-making in order to address the gap between what students know and need to learn, so that all students and pertinent subgroups experience consistent high levels of engagement, thinking and achievement. Strenghts: Based on 2018-2019 PPO 1. The principal has a system that engages all faculty members in cycles of inquiry- based professional collaborations to strengthen instructional capacity, and teacher leadership ensuring that teachers play integral roles in key decisions to impact student learning across the school. Teachers meet in department meetings, grade team meetings, in the student intervention team, and at retreats that have resulted in coherent procedures and protocols implemented during meetings. 2. The meeting mentioned above also inform the professional development plan based on teacher and student needs. These diverse venues create adult learning environments that afford teachers opportunities for sharing a variety of perspectives. Grade teams have consistently met during cycle 1 to examine student data and continue to understand and interpret data that will assist in creating a data chart to enable the team to further assess student data and determine patterns and trends. 2018-19 CEP 23  Based on the 2014-2015 QR: 1. The majority of teachers meet regularly in structured professional collaborations. They meet for the inquiry team work, every teacher and paraprofessional supports students looked at during inquiry. 2. Teachers meet in department meetings, grade team meetings, in SIT, and school-wide retreats to collaborate to discuss both the academic and social-emotional well-being of our students. 3. Teachers participate in inter-visitations which help strengthen teacher practice. 4. Teachers receive professional development and continuously work on the Hochman Basic Writing program, the principles of Teach Like a Champion, Analyze Complex Text (ACT) protocol among other school-wide initiatives to build coherence throughout the school and align to the instructional shifts. These initiatives have also helped students build their literacy, especially writing skills. Students are writing more and better quality papers across the grades. 5. Teachers lead professional development to support their colleagues with meeting the needs of the subgroups. English as a second language and Special education teachers have provided professional development on ways to provide supports and scaffold for different learners. Needs: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of staff will report that they have utilized a professional development or workshop technique to improve instructional outcomes, as measured by Summative Conference reflections as well as the professional development section within the Framework for Great Schools Report, 2019. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD Team Meets monthly to discuss relevance and coherence of the PD cycles that are being offered PD will be offered in cycles to allow for teacher choice and targeted sessions to meet the needs of our teachers PD Team Sept PD Team All Staff Sept - June PD session at the beginning of the year will be directly tied to our instructional focus and will support teachers in ways to increase student cognitive engagement in their classrooms All Staff Sept - December Staff Members Admin, PD team Admin will conduct targeted informal observations with feedback on implementation of strategies introduced through PD (e.g., Making Thinking Visible, questioning and discussion techniques, use of formative assessments, cultural responsiveness) Model Teacher Team will introduce plan for inter-visitations to support peer-based learning around the school's instructional focus Data Team will lead workshop for preliminary assessment of PD impact in classrooms at November Retreat through review and analysis of student work All Staff Sept - June Admin All Staff October Model Teacher Team All Staff November Admin Data Team PD Team 3 times a year Admin, Pd Team, Staff members PD cycles will match teachers needs as seen from staff surveys All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will have the Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Counselor conduct multiple trainings on this. One will be in September, one in January and one in March Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Mentor Text (Making Thinking Visible), Use of Monday PD time, Peer Inter-visitations, Model teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2019, 70% of staff will report that they have utilized a professional development or workshop technique to improve instructional outcomes, as measured by guided reflection at Retreat. By January 2019, 80% of staff will demonstrate the use of a PD technique to shift instructional outcomes, as measured by informal observation reports. By January 2019, the PD Team will obtain feedback from at least 80% of staff to reassess PD efficacy to plan for Spring 2019 PD Cycles. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Conduct informal observations with same-week feedback on implementation of PD strategies. Conduct staff reflection within Grade Team meetings on instructional impacts. Conduct staff surveys on PD effectiveness and responsiveness. Conduct peer inter-visitations to support peer learning and reflections. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) 2.3 Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional 2.4 Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. Tenet 2 - School Leader Practices and Decisions: Visionary leaders create a school community and culture that lead to success, well-being and high academic outcomes for all students via systems of continuous and sustainable school improvement. Strengths: 1. According to the 2017 Framework for Great Schools Report, 95% responded that they were satisfied with the instructional leadership of the principal as opposed to the city average of 2. Our teachers' positive responses on the 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report were 6% higher than the 3. city average in the areas of the principal's instructional leadership. In the 2016 PPO section of the Measures of Leadership Practice, QR Indicator 3.4, it was stated that, "The principal’s high leveraging structures communicate high expectations and facilitate the school’s initiatives, which inform a set of professional learning sessions to improve classroom practices such as Socratic Seminar and analysis of complex text. A focus on academic and personal behaviors and family support is endorsed across the school. Supervisors and staff implement well-known and valued expectations that include core beliefs, a uniform policy, attendance and punctuality, and homework criteria. GoogleDocs provides staff members a shared system of information regarding students, curriculum, and anecdotal outcomes that include student work used by teacher teams. An active web site, the Engrade system, and progress reports 2018-19 CEP 27  4. Needs provide families continuous support and ongoing feedback of their teen’s progress, thus cultivating a school tone of high expectations with support, and a culture of mutual accountability to assist students in making progress toward college and career preparation. In the 2016 PPO section of the Measures of Leadership Practice section, QR Indicator 4.2, it was stated that, "The principal engages all teachers in cycles of inquiry-based professional collaborations to build instructional capacity and leadership skills, ensuring that they take on essential roles in key decisions to impact student learning across the school. Supervisors and teacher teams meet horizontally and vertically, and at retreats held periodically, providing a diversity of venues to encourage adult learning and afford staff opportunities to share their perspectives. Numerous staff members partake in the Teacher Leadership Program and have active roles leading staff development, thus strengthening instructional practices to affect learning across the school. 1. According to the 2016 Prinicpal's PPO Measures of Leadership Practice section, QR Indicator 1.2, it was stated that the principal should, "Strengthen the observation and feedback process in order to provide reliable information in a timely manner supporting all teachers and accurately capturing the strengths and challenges of teacher practice. Memorialize specific highlights and effective feedback aligned to teacher ratings informed by the Danielson rubric to leverage changes that improve the school process for evaluation accordingly. When meeting with teachers refer to progress made toward achievement of their individual goals and provide clear next steps from frequent cycles of classroom observations to affect student learning, teacher development, and reflections centered on effective practices and student data." 2. According to the Prinicpal's PPO for the school year 2015-16, QR Indicator 4.1, it was stated that, "The principal should: " Expand the effectiveness of pedagogical practices to include a variety of strategies such as deliberately planned scaffolds, and questioning techniques that strengthen comprehension skills. During classroom visits, it was noted that teachers consistently afforded the students questions that would prompt them into thinking. However, ensure that teachers modify their questions and move them quickly into critical thinking questions as the lesson progresses, to challenge students in productive struggle with both content and skills. Also, assess the scaffolds to ensure that teachers are strategically implementing supports based on their knowledge of students, their preferred learning styles and the criteria for the lessons to encourage higher levels of student participation and ownership of the learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will see an increase in teacher effectiveness ratings on Danielson 3c, by 3% through weekly informal observations and feedback cycles targeting cognitive engagement resulting in a 5% increase on the 2018-19 N.Y. State ELA Test. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal continues to participate in mathematics team meetings, grade team meetings and professional development planning meetings as well as implementation of PDs. Principal Sept-June Principal Principal creates Data Team to assess instruction for subgroups (SWDs, ENLs, overage) and to identify categories of "cusp students" Subgroups, Data Team Sept-Oct Principal Principal meets with Data Team on a monthly basis to form recommendations for instructional foci (pertaining to targeted students and subgroups) and to inform planning of the observation calendar. Principal schedules observations, altering the calendar as needed on a month-by-month basis as per Data Team triangulation, and provides feedback within two days of the observation. When meeting with teachers, the principal refers to progress made toward achievement of individual goals and provides clear next steps to "affect student learning, teacher development, and reflections centered on effective practices and student data." Principal updates staff on strategies presented in professional development (questioning and discussion techniques) as part of the observation and feedback cycle. Principal schedules follow-up informal observations to determine impact of observation cycles on classroom instruction and academic achievement. Based on impact evaluation, Principal schedules teacher-mentoring and/or intervisitations to support teachers in developing multiple entry points, UDL instruction, and questioning and discussion techniques. Principal Oct-June Principal Select Teachers Principal Sept-June Principal Staff Sept-June Principal Staff Oct-June Principal Staff Oct-June Principal Staff Oct-June Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 29  We will have the Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Counselors conduct multiple trainings on this. One will be in September, one in January and one in March Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human capital, Parent Workshops led by a part-time Guidance counselor, Training on CCLS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, informal observation reports will demonstrate a 5% increase in effective teacher ratings for Danielson 3c "Student Engagement in Learning." By January 2019, the frequency of informal observation and feedback reports will increase by 5%, as measured by ADVANCE reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP data and Superintendent and TDEC feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement: Strengths According to the 2016-17 Framework for Great Schools Report,: -94% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. (Q1a) -97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) -95% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school. (Q1e) Needs According to the 2016-17 NYC School Survey: 2018-19 CEP 31  -78% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction. (Q1b) -53% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent involvement, as measured by attendance logs to community workshops, trainings, student celebrations and after school events. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Form a Community Outreach Committee, comprised of teachers, support staff, and CBO staff. Parents Sept-Oct Admin Staff CBO partners Community Outreach Committee meets and/or communicates weekly to plan and execute two Parent/Family Events per month. Parents/ Nov-June Outreach Committee Community Outreach Committee conducts a Family Learning night for ELA/Social Studies and one for Math/Science in the fall and spring semesters. During workshops, Facilitators gather data on Parent/Family interest for specific topics and trainings (to inform Outreach planning). Community Outreach Committee conducts a workshop at school retreats and two mid-year PDs to update staff on community events, logging of parent/family communication using school-wide database, and promote positive communication channels. Technology Team creates and updates a website to inform students, staff, parents, and community members of all school events. Family Members Community Parents/ Nov and Outreach Committee Family Members Feb Community Parents/ Nov-June Outreach Committee Facilitators or Workshop Facilitators Family Members Community All staff Nov, Jan, Mar, June Outreach Committee Entire Sept-June Admin Select Teachers Community Technology Team and Website Contributors Technology Team updates Twitter feed to inform students, staff, parents, and community members of all school events. Entire Sept-June Admin Community 2018-19 CEP 33 Technology Team provides website and "Twitter refresher" workshop for all staff at school retreats and mid-year PDs. All staff Nov, Jan, Mar, June Outreach Committee Select Teachers Technology Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Beacon, Edible Schoolyard, Algebra for All Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Admin, Staff, students, technology Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, parent outreach efforts through website, Twitter, phone, and mail correspondence will increase by 5%. By January 2019, parent attendance to school-hosted community events will increase by 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Surveys,, parent attendance data from events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest Third Mathematics Lowest Third Science Social Studies Lowest Third/8th Grade Lowest Third Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Phonics, Strategic Reading Program including Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Wilson, Rewards, Achieve 3000. Skill based interventions as per the Engage NY Currciulum,as well as the ICE strategy and the Think Through Math program. After School Tutoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group , tutoring, whole class, one-one After school and during the day. Small group , tutoring, whole class, one-one After school and during the day Small group After School After School Tutoring small group After school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEPs, lowest third, ELL status Counseling and intervention provided by guidance, social work, school psychologist, special education coordinator Small group , tutoring, , one-one After school and during the day 2018-19 CEP 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 46 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Our STH students receive the following physical and socio-emotional supports: counseling services, school supplies,    meals for holidays,     access to the school's food pantry, the opportunity to have their school uniforms laundered at schools, links to community resources, and access to parent workshops. In addition, the school pays for all school-based events (i.e. field trips, senior dues, etc...). Our STH students receive the following academic/socio-emotional supports:       advisory (CREW), team-building curriculum, and restorative circles intervention, as needed within CREW periods access to the Extended Learning academic program access to the after-school Beacon Program individual or small-group AIS intervention, as identified by SIT anti-bullying campaign through guidance department financial literacy development through Everbuck Accounts (Positive Behavior Reward System) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 36  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 37  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We maintain a positive school culture which largely contributes to teacher retention. In addition, administration maintains an open door policy. Many of our teachers are referred to us from current staff members who are happy at the school. We conduct frequent teacher observations and provide timely feedback to ensure that our staff is highly qualified. We offer differentiated PD as well as inquiry studies by grade. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development includes: Topics Rationale The Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) supports literacy teaching and learning across all content areas. MSQI partners with schools to provide resources, on-site coaching, and adult learning opportunities in pursuit of the goal that all students leave middle school reading, writing, speaking, and thinking independently on grade level. NTN supports teachers with real-time coaching as well as support in lesson development. Impact ● Teachers are better prepared to address students’ reading and writing needs as a result of on-site coaching and professional development on Making Thinking Visible and Notice and Note reading routines. ● Closing the gap between where students are and the prescribed Common Core level of reading and writing skills. Clsoing the achievement gap for our students. MSQI National Training Network (NTN) Classroom Environment, School Culture, Systems and Structures Need for a streamlined behavior systems. Need for consistent systems schoolwide since in middle school students see at least 5 different teachers a day A significant decrease in referrals and incidents 2018-19 CEP 38  TLAC (Emotional Constancy, Narrating the Task, Positive Framing), On Your Mark Challenge ● Less negative teacher to student talk Research-based concrete, specific and actionable teaching techniques ● Focus on the positive Danielson Framework State-required teacher practice monitoring framework Progress Monitoring of School-Wide Systems and Structures Best practice for administration to evaluate implemented systems and structures ● Positive school culture ● End result is improved student achievement ● Clear foci for teacher observations ● More actionable feedback ● Smooth implementation of procedures and protocols ● Ensure that short and long-term goals are met ● Make adjustments that impact the school sooner Provide staff with trainings on how to incorporate more technology into the classroom (google drive, student using blogs, google drive, etc.) As teachers become more comfortable using tech they will be able to incorporate it more into their classrooms Students will become more tech savvy and will learn how to use technology during their middle school years which will help them be career and college ready. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Using MSQI and the NYC Writing Curriciulum will create a stronger culture of literacy and a love for reading and writing which are the foundation of the CCLS/NGS. The National Training Network will support math teachers in creating opportunities for students to engage in high level CCLS/NGS aligned work in mathematics. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 39  EMS offers after school learning opportunities, the Math and Science Regents for 8th graders, AIS, etc... Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). na 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet in content teams led by administrative content experts and collaboratively decide on the formative and summative assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) X X X X Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal TBD TBD TBD TBD 2018-19 CEP 40  Tax Levy (FSF) Local TBD X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2018-19 CEP 41  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Evergreen Middle School for Urban Exploration , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Evergreen Middle School for Urban Exploration will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Evergreen Middle School for Urban Exploration , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP 45  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP 47  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP 48  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 49  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Many of our ELL students are struggling readers in English. We are proposing are an afterschool reading intervention program for 6-8 grade ELLs. Research shows that learners who are proficient in their native language can acquire new languages with more ease and greater proficiency. The afterschool program will utilize Fountas and Pinell Reading Assessments, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data to create a program that would focus on fluency, vocabulary and conversation skill development for Emerging and Entering students and vocabulary development, phonics and reading comprehension skills for Transitioning and Expanding students. The program would be offered to our 50 current ELL students who show significant gaps (2+ years) in their grade level reading proficiency in English. There will be three ENL teachers for the Title III enrichment program who teach three classes separated by proficiency levels (one class at the Entering/Emerging level and two at the Transitioning/Expanding level organized by reading proficiency). The program will take place after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40-4:00. The program will begin in November to give the school enough time to gather assessment data. The program will run for approximately 18 weeks not including school breaks for a total number of 36 sessions. At the end of the program students will be reassessed using the Fountas and Pinell Assessment system in order to track growth. Students will be invited to the program through a letter sent home in parent's home language. The letter will specify the goals of the program, the dates and duration. Attendance will be taken daily via the school's electronic Google drive attendance document. To facilitate reading instruction we will need folders for students, three Just Words Instructor Manuals, two Just Words Teacher Kit and one Wilson Fluency Basics Kit. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 CEP 51  Part C: Professional Development In Summer 2018, Ruben Martinez (ESL teacher) attended an Just Words training offered by the DOE. In the month of October for one two-hour session after school, he will hold a turnkey training for four ESL teachers in order to train them on this system. This will help inform instruction in the after school Title III program which we are proposing as we plan on using these Just Words instruction manuals and teacher kits for reading intervention. An agenda will be created by Ruben Martinez for this training and attendance will be taken on the day of the training. Additionally, we will hold a study group one hour per week after school for 18 weeks on Tuesdays from 4:00-5:00 (after school hours) (Starting in November). These study groups will be facilitated by Kendra Miller (ESL teacher and ELL Coordinator). The topics covered will be specific reading strategies from the Wilson program and the "Reading with Power and Passion" curriculum, ENL curriculum and instructional models that can be implemented in the after school program. Other topics may include student needs and progress in the after school program. This will help ELLs by ensuring that strategies learned in the after school program are also implemented during the day in ELA and ENL classes. Attendance will be taken at each study group to track which teachers attend and meeting notes will be recorded and kept in the school Google Drive account. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We plan on offering parents of ELL students who are in the afterschool Title III enrichment program the chance to participate in two after-school information sessions. Both sessions will be led by the three program teachers (ENL and Bilingual certified). The proposed schedule is one meeting in November and one in March both in the evening after school. The parent coordinator will not be a part of these sessions, as we are only targeting the parents of ELLs who will be attending the after school Title III enrichment program. The three program teachers will plan and lead both meetings and the three program teachers will each be paid for running both of these parent sessions using funds from the program (a total of two and a half hours for each of the three teachers). The first session will take place at the beginning of the program in November. It will be an hour long information session in the evening. The topics covered will be on the schedule and goals of the afterschool Title III enrichment program. There wilol also be time for parents to ask questions about the program. Notices in students’ home language will be sent home ahead of time to invite all ELL parents to the meeting. The three afterschool teachers will attend and lead. The information at the meeting will be presented in both English and Spanish by bilingual teachers to accommodate parents' language needs and agendas in both English and Spanish will 2018-19 CEP 52  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities be provided to parents at the start of the meeting. Attendance will be taken via the school's Google Drive established system. Refreshments will be provided at cost of the program. The second session will take place at the end of the 18-week afterschool Title III program (in March in the evening). The topic of this meeting will be a showcase of what the students in the program have learned. Students will present projects completed in the after school program. This session will be one and a half hours. Notices in students’ home language will be sent home ahead of time inviting parents to attend. All three program teachers will attend and lead. Parent attendance will be taken via the school's Google drive established system. Refreshments will be provided at the cost of the program. This session will also be conducted in both English and Spanish and agendas in both English and Spanish will be provided to parents at the start of the meeting. The following records will be scanned and kept on file on the school's Google Drive account: Copies of notices sent home to parents in their preferred languages, agendas, attendance, and meeting notes for both meetings. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 53  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Evergreen Middle School for Urban Explor Borough Brooklyn School Number 562 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lauren Reiss Coach n/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kendra Miller Teacher/Subject Area Gesai Abadia/Bilingual Math Teacher/Subject Area Lina Asca/Home Language Arts Related-Service Provider E. Dipietro/SpEd Coordinator Superintendent Sheila Gorski Assistant Principal Claudia Harris Coach N/a School Counselor Lucila Macias Parent Claudio Sanchez Parent Coordinator Nancy Soto Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP 55  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 318 Total number of ELLs 76 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 23.90% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown 6 7 7 12 8 11 9 10 11 12 Tot # Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2013-2014 K 1 2 3 4 5 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 12 11 0 0 0 0 30 0 0 0 0 0 30 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses several measures to assess the literary skills of our ELL students. We conduct Fountas and Pinnell assessments 3 times per year in English. We use the ENIL to assess TBE students' Spanish reading. We use these levels to determine and support our curriculum and instruction. The majority of our ELL students are reading below grade level. In the previous school year, a total of 78 ELLs were tested across grades 6-8. During the baseline assessment, the average reading level was approximately at the 3.9 grade level. As a result, we use students' Fountas and Pinnel levels to group our students into small groups with students at similar levels. We use guided reading and the Language Literacy Intervention (LLI) as a means of supporting students at the 1-2 grade level. Additionally, we use the CORE phonics assessment to determine which ELL students need more support with basic phonics. 2018-19 CEP 56  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Depending on the student's level, they are placed in a Strategic Reading Intervention class three mornings per week to receive targeted reading instruction at their levels. In addition we have a Title III After school program that helps reinforce students' reading and writing in Spanish as well as strengthen their literacy skills in English. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use a number of data pieces to evaluate the success of our ELL programs. We use large summative assessments such as the NYSESLAT and state test scores to determine if our ELL students are making progress. In the 2016 school year, about half of our ELLs moved up at least one level according to the NYSESLAT. Between 2016 and 2017, ELL's ELA State Test Scores improved minimally. We also use baseline, midline and endline writing assessments from ELA class which we develop in our school. Students are given an argument style text with two clearly defined sides to an issue. Students must write an argumentative essay with text evidence that chooses one side of the argument. Students are then assessed on a Common Core Aligned Grade Level Rubric. On average, ELLs grew 2 writing grade levels in their writing from September through June. We assess students' reading through the Fountas and Pinnell running records assessments. We also saw great growth in F & P scores, with ELLs on average increasing their score by an entire grade band. These assessments have demonstrated significant progress in reading and writing for our ELL students. We will work to include more assessments of spoken language and listening to support the instruction of those modalities. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Last school year we started a Strategic Reading program which places students in reading classes based on their levels in order to provide targeted reading instruction. In addition we have AIS several times a week to help students who are below grade level for reading and/or writing. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We saw a great increase in proficiency level of our students in 8 th grade. We believe this can be attributed to three years of solid instruction and coherent ENL/ELA curriculum which builds on itself. We also saw many of our 6 th graders remain at the entering level. We attribute this to a number of issues. We had many newcomers in our 6 th grade class, arriving mid-year or later. While these students made significant progress in their classes, this progress couldn't accurately be measured by the NYSESLAT. We will continue to support these entering students through self-contained ENL instruction as well as exposure to ENL/ELA. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet during weekly grade teams to discuss student needs with other grade content teachers.. Ell Coordinator meets monthly with administrators to talk about ELL need in terms of programming and curriculum. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 2018-19 CEP 57  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students in our freestanding ENL program receive ENL minutes and instruction through their English Language Arts classes using an integrated ENL model. ELL students are spread through out 4 different co-horts in each grade. We have ELL students in our Freestanding ENL program in our self-contained special education classes. These students are at mixed proficiency levels and also with non ELLs. They receive ENL services through 360 minutes of push-in integrated ENL instruction. In our general education classes we have an ENL teacher pushing in with one heterogeneous cohort (of ELLs and non-ELL students) where the ELLs are at the transitioning, expanding level or recently proficient commanding level. With this co-hort the ENL teacher pushes in to their ELA class 6 periods a week for 45 minutes which gives the students 270 minutes of integrated ENL support per week. Lastly, when it it is time for ELA, ELL students in our last two co-horts come together to make one ELA class entirely comprised of ELL students and students with IEPs for ICT/ENL/ELA. In 6th and 7 th grade, this class is co-taught by three teachers (one ENL teacher, one Special Education teacher, and one general education ELA teacher). In 8 th grade, the class is taught by two teachers (one ENL/ELA teacher and one Special Education teacher). Students in these classes receive ENL instruction in integrated co-taught classes for 6 periods per week which gives them a total of 270 minutes of ENL support per week. Students at the entering and emerging level are pulled out for a separate standalone ENL and ELA class. They receive 5 periods per week of standalone ENL instruction with an ENL teacher and 4 periods per week of integrated ENL/ELA with an ENL/ELA teacher. As a result, students at the entering ENL level receive a total of 405 ENL minutes per week. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students in our TBE program receive bilingual Spanish instruction through Math, Science, and Home Language Arts. We have a 6 th -7 th bridge class comprised of ELLs at varying English proficiency levels and an 8 th grade class comprised of ELLs at various proficiency levels. Students at the entering and emerging proficiency levels receive bilingual instruction during Math, Science, and HLA. Students at the transitioning and expaning levels receive bilinugal instruction for Math and HLA. Students in the TBE program also receive ENL instruction based on their proficiency levels. ENL instruction is provided through ELA classes, and the bilingual cohorts in 6-8 th grade, join their ELL peers in the Freestanding ENL program for ENL instruction as is outlined above. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Freestanding ENL Program, students receive their ENL instructional minutes by proficiency according to the following break down: Entering ELLs: 225 minutes of standalone ENL per week and 180 minutes of intergrated ENL/ELA per week. Emerging ELLs: 405 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. ENL minutes are given during co-taught ELA classes. Transitioning ELLs: 405 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. ENL minutes are given during co-taught ELA classes. Expanding ELLs: 225 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Depending on the cohort or grade of the expanding ELL, the student may receive up to 405 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. The minimum number of minutes provided to students at this proficiency level is 225. Commanding ELLs: 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Depending on the cohort or grade, some of the commanding students receive 225 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. In the Transitional Bilingual Education Program, students receive the following services: Entering ELLs: 225 minutes of standalone ENL per week and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week, at least 180 minutes of HLA instruction per week. Entering ELLs in 6-7 TBE cohort receive 225 minutes of HLA per week, 405 minutes of bilingual Math instruction, and 180 minutes of bilingual Science instruction. Emerging ELLs: 405 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. ENL minutes are given during co-taught ELA classes. 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week, at least 180 minutes of HLA instruction per week. Entering ELLs in 6-7 TBE cohort receive 225 2018-19 CEP 58  minutes of HLA per week, 405 minutes of bilingual Math instruction, and 180 minutes of bilingual Science instruction. Transitioning ELLs: 405 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. ENL minutes are given during co-taught ELA classes. At least 180 minutes of HLA instruction per week. Transitioning ELLs in 6-7 TBE cohort receive 225 minutes of HLA per week and 405 minutes of bilingual Math instruction. Expanding ELLs: 225 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Depending on the cohort or grade of the expanding ELL, the student may receive up to 405 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. The minimum number of minutes provided to students at this proficiency level is 225. At least 180 minutes of HLA instruction per week. Expanding ELLs in 6-7 TBE cohort receive 225 minutes of HLA per week and 405 minutes of bilingual Math instruction. Commanding ELLs: 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. Depending on the cohort or grade, some of the commanding students receive 225 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Freestanding ENL Program, core content is delivered through rigourous and engaging Common Core aligned curriculum. Teachers collaborate with one another to ensure that their instruction is engaging and accessible. We use the Hochman Basic Writing Skills (BWS) program to teach and scaffold academic writing. This program is taught through ELA/ENL, but is then practiced in Social Studies and Science as well. Content area teams and grade teams meet weekly to discuss instruction, inquiry, curriculum, and student needs. ELL students are often at the forefront of these discussions and efforts. In our TBE program, core content in Math and Science is delivered in rich Spanish instruction. Our bilingual teachers use the same curriculum and practices used in our grade-level general education core classes to ensure that all students, regardless of the language of instruction, have access to the same high-quality instruction and curriculum. Our Math department uses CMP3 which is a common core aligned, standards based program. Math teachers support students in gaining a deep understanding through their use of the Brain Stretch/ICE Strategy (Illustrate, Calculate, Explain). This format requires students to initially illustrate their understanding of a word problem. The next step is for students to show their calculations, and finally students are asked to explain their thinking. This process ensures that student work across grades is coherent and that students are thinking deeply about how to apply the skills and knowledge they are acquiring as opposed to performing rote calculations in isolation. Our Math Department has seen students demonstrate significant gains on their performance series assessments with the help and support of these strategies. Our Science Department is currently undergoing a comprehensive revision of the science curriculum with a clear focus on developing vertical coherence and the use of the specific Hochman BWS strategies that support science learning (syntax development, text annotation, note taking, explanatory and informational paragraphs, and writing lab reports). This will take place over the next two years, with the expectation that by the end of 2017-2018 each unit will have been written, implemented and annotated for revision the following year. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL students are evaluated in their home language for major assessments when appropriate to the task and content area. For example, subject area MOSLs are provided to the student in their home language when available. Students are also able to complete performance series assessments for math in their home language. All assessments in our TBE classes are given in Spanish. In the past we have used Fountas and Pinnell (Levels A-N) and Achieve 3000 software to assess students literacy levels in Spanish. We are currently researching other methods for assessing students' literacy in Spanish as neither of the previously mentioned assessments were appropriate with students at our grade levels. All assessments for ELA/ENL are completed in English as is appropriate to measuring the students' English language proficiency and progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students typically have very few literacy skills in either English or their native language. We support these students by providing phonics instruction (using a modified WILSON curriculum). Students are invited to participate in a before school 2018-19 CEP 59  phonics program, and also receive Phonics intervention during reading instruction in their ENL/ELA class. In addition, writing instruction is adapted to meet the needs of students at their language level, e.g. we provide sentence level scaffolds, complete shared writing activities, and work on adding sight words into their writing. Often SIFE students are not yet able to complete assignments at grade-level. As a result, we need to modify activities greatly to meet their needs and also provide a great deal of intervention. Although these students may not have a disability, we often place them in an ICT class or a class that receives additional teacher support. This allows our teachers to provide more individualized instruction to meet the needs of these students. b. Newcomer ELLs also often score at an entering level on the NYSITELL. As a result, this group receives one unit of study each week in standalone ENL instruction. This course focuses on students survival-level English vocabulary acquisition and is focused on developing students' oral English skills. The class is also typically much smaller than a standard ELA class, which gives our newcomer students more teacher attention and support. Newcomer Spanish speakers typically choose to participate in our TBE program where they will also receive the rich native language instruction to support their language learning in English. c. We have found that the needs and abilities of the Developing subgroup of ELLs are extrememly varied. One way that we are able to tailor the instruction for this group is through small group guided reading instruction. At this level, we may still have students struggling with basic phonics. We also have students who are reading much closer to grade level, and for them we may support their literacy through tier two and three vocabulary support or guided reading to support deeper comprehension. We use an academic vocabulary curriculum with all of our students (ELLs and non-ELLs), that is written to support the aqucisition of frequently appearing Tier II vocabulary words, such as evaluate, assess and differentiate. This vocabulary instruction is very supportive to students at the developing level who have typically aquired proficient basic interpersonal communication skills, but still need support in aquiring academic language. Students are introduced to three new words per week, and these words are practiced in each content area, so that students receive constant exposure and practice with the words of the week. d. Long-term ELLs in our school are also instructed in the academic vocabulary curriculum as described above. For this subgroup, the instruction in academic vocabulary is also essential to their development of English proficiency. This group also receives guided reading support to continue to support their English reading. Students receive scaffolding and support through the BWS program to enhance their academic writing. Students at this level are often expanding ELLs who are very close to passing the NYSESLAT. With this subgroup, we plan to offer more listening practice to their enhance ability to listen to long sections of text or lecture without scaffolding. Many members of this subgroup also have IEPs, and therefore receive additional extra support as mandated by their IEPs. e. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of push-in ENL support in their ELA classes. ENL teachers assess and monitor the work of these students in order to provide targeted support to meet their needs. ENL teachers may scaffold assignments, provide sentence starters when necessary or help students to self-correct work based on subject verb errors. Work with this subgroup is completely tailored to the individual student's needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In ELA/ENL, Social Studies, and Science teachers of ELL-SWDs use the Hochman BWS program that provides a program for annotation, scaffolds for improving sentence and paragraph level writing as well as plans and graphic organizers for writing essays. These language and writing scaffolds have been extremely successful in accelerating English language development for our ELL-SWDs. Multiple exposures to the same strategies have led to our students using BWS techniques with ease and independence. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school program this year was created around optimization for our ELLs and SWD. Over the summer Ms. Harris, Assistant Principal, along with our ELL coordinator, Ms. Miller and our Special Education coordinator, Ms. Dipietro, worked tirelessly on creating a unique schedule to address the needs of our students, which meant creating a program that provided all students (including our high ELL and SWD populations) with opportunities to be educated in the most appropriate, supportive, and responsive environment. The result of their work was a schedule that allows all ELL students to be fully integrated into our 2018-19 CEP 60  classes, rather than being separated off into their own class as had been done previously. As a result, according to our self-created school survey results, we have seen that our ELL population feels more welcomed and integrated into our school community. In addition, the program has a unique ELA flip, which means that the ELL students are able to receive 100% of their ESL minutes without missing any of their core subjects. During this flip the ESL students are swapped into one class, resulting in a class with two or three teachers, one ESL/ELA, one Special Ed and one ELA, dedicated to ensuring that these students receive extra support in this very important core subject. Using this structure, our ELL-SWDs are able to achieve their IEP goals and progress in their English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. As a result of this unique program, we have seen that there has been an increase in our ELL students reading levels, .5 years reading level growth in 3 months and .6 years writing level growth in 3 months. Our ELL-SWDs in the self-contained special education receive ENL support through ENL push-in teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In ELA, we use a variety of targeted interventions for our ELL students. All ELL and FELL students who were reading below an F&P level N (approximately 3 rd grade) were mandated to attend our before school Phonics Program. We had students from each of our ELL subgroups enrolled in the program (ranging from newcomer to FELL). We saw significant growth from students attending the Phonics Program, with students growing at least four F&P levels on average. We also have an afterschool program, Achieve Now Academy, where ELL students from all subgroups received tutoring in Math and ELA, participated in book clubs, 8 th grade Science Exam support, and had their first exposures to Shakespeare. In addition, this year, teachers who had free teaching periods in their schedule are now pushing-in to provide small group intervention to students who may need it, including ELL students at all proficiency levels. Teachers push-in to ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies to help support struggling students. Through these interventions, ELLs have demonstrated at least one year of growth in writing according to the Common Core aligned grade level rubric, and many have also made steady gains in Math as demonstrated by the performance series assessments. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Using our baseline benchmark data (reading, writing, and math) we may create targetted intervention groups for our ELL students within the Achieve Now Academy afterschool program. For example, if we identify a major subset of students all struggling with organizing their writing on a paragraph and essay level, we may hold an intervention group to meet the needs of those students. We may also work with Beacon, the after school program in our school building, to develop additional enrichment and support for our newcomer ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this point, we do not plan to discontinue any programs or services for our ELL students. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs in our school building are invited to take part in any and all school programs. We had several ELLs enrolled in our after school Achieve Now Academy and our before school Phonics Program. Additionally, we have a Beacon program in our school building which offers homework help, classes, enrichment, and sports to all of the students in our school building from 2:35-8:00PM each night, on Saturdays and during school vacations. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In Science, Social Studies, ELA, and HLA we use the Hochman BWS method and strategies. The notetaking devices, scaffolds, and graphic organizers are widely utilized across these content areas. We also use a school-wide academic vocabulary program which is taught and practiced in all of our school's content areas. In Math, we use CMP3 in English and Spanish along with the ICE strategy. We are going to be using Achieve 3000 this year to support literacy in English and Spanish. We have also used Rosetta Stone for our newcomer students in the past, and may look into this technology again as a resource for our newcomers. 2018-19 CEP 61  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program model, home language is used to support students in their core content classes through the use of native language dictionaries/glossaries when available. When a teacher who speaks the student's native language is presence, this teacher may also preview, summarize or clarify a concept or text in the student's native language as needed or as is appropriate to the task or activity. In the TBE program model, Spanish is used as the primary language of instruction for both Math and Science. Students' lessons are conducted in Spanish and the work, activities, and projects that they complete are all done in Spanish. In HLA, students are continuing their Spanish literacy and writing. Students complete tasks in Spanish that are more challenging versions of activities and strategies that are used in ELA. This strategy has helped support their comprehension when they come to ENL/ELA. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All students are in the class or grade that is appropriate for their age group. Although many of our ELLs are reading far below grade level, we make sure that they have texts and materials that are high interest for their age group and engaging for them to read while also being appropriate to their reading level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In Science, Social Studies, ELA, and HLA we use the Hochman BWS method and strategies. The notetaking devices, scaffolds, and graphic organizers are widely utilized across these content areas. We also use a school-wide academic vocabulary program which is taught and practiced in all of our school's content areas. In Math, we use CMP3 in English and Spanish along with the ICE strategy. We are going to be using Achieve 3000 this year to support literacy in English and Spanish. We have also used Rosetta Stone for our newcomer students in the past, and may look into this technology again as a resource for our newcomers. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students meet with the ELL Coordinator, Ms. Miller, for a basic school orientation. Ms. Miller gives the students a tour of the building, guides them to class their first day and ensures that they have met up with their parents or been sent home independently during their first few days in the building. Ms. Miller and the the newcomer ENL teacher, Ms Del Rosario, act as point people for the new students in their first few days by fielding any questions and helping the students to get acclimated. In addition, newly enrolled ELLs are paired with an ELL buddy who travels in their co-hort. This student helps ensure that the the new ELL knows where to go and can ask for help if they need anything. Our Parent Coordinator is also a support and point person for the new student and their family. Through our Title III funding, we plan to host other programs or trips specifically for newcomer students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All 8 th grade students, including ELLs, participate in a Spanish language elective. Our Spanish teacher adjusts the curriculum and instruction for native Spanish speaking ELLs in order to support their literacy rather than their basic vocabulary development like their non-ELL peers. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 2018-19 CEP 62  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers meet weekly as a content team to discuss curriculum, strategies and share best practices. TBE teachers also meet weekly to discuss curriculum and strategies and are supported by Claudia Harris. Within the first month of school all teachers will be required to attend a PD developed by MS Miller that gives each teacher an overview of the ELL students in each class, their levels, needs and some helpful suggestions for how to differentiate instruction and build language when an ENL teacher is not pushing into your class. Additionally, content area teachers will be participating in ELL-related PDs once a month on Tuesdays during our afterschool PD. These PDs will be developed by our ELL Coordinator, Ms. Miller, along with the ENL team. The PDs will involve some modeling and demonstration of different ELL strategies and will also include time for collaborative co-planning where teachers will plan how they will utilize and integrate the ELL strategies in their upcoming lessons. These PDs will be developed by the ENL and TBE teams for the whole school community. Additionally, content area teachers will be participating in ELL-related PDs once a month on Tuesdays during our afterschool PD time (as described above). Teachers are also notified of PDs through the DELLSS Office, and have attended many of the PDs on developing curriculum aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our incoming 6 th grade ELLs are placed in a CREW with an ENL teacher or a teacher who speaks their native language. This person becomes a point person for the student and their family as they navigate the start of middle school. The curriculum in CREW is also based around being successful in middle school and challenges in adjusting to a new school. We also have a bilingual guidance counselor, Lucila Macias, and social worker, Michelle Jerry, who regularly meet with nearly all our new 6 th graders for a one to one session during this transitional period. Our 8 th grade ELLs receive ample support in the high school search and application process during CREW and from their CREW leaders. The 8 th grade CREW curriculum was developed to support students in the search, selection, and application process for high school in New York City. Our bilingual guidance counselor regularly meets with students and their parents to ensure that students are transitioning to high schools that are supportive of their language needs. Both the guidance counselor and school social work regularly attend professional development to support their efforts within the school. They have attended numerous trainings through the New York City Department of Education, the UFT, and often additional trainings provided by universities in the New York City area. Since these numbers are based on a 5 year schedule, our teachers will have no problem completing the mandated PD hours for ELL-specific professional development. We keep records of agendas, minutes, and attendance from all of our team meetings and PDs. ENL and TBE teachers meet weekly. At these meetings, we co-plan and share best practices and strategies that we are having success with. We are currently working to develop a PD for the whole staff on using language objectives. We use our planning time for our own professional development and growth and for planning professional learning activities for the rest of the staff to be taught during our once a month meetings. During the meetings that include all teachers, we share one or two strategies for helping ELL students access the curriculum and also make progress in their English proficiency. Then the teachers have time co-plan with the ENL teachers and TBE teachers to ensure that they are adapting or adding to their curriculum as needed. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 CEP 63  Since this is a new provision, we plan to hold an ELL Parent Workshop Event in the fall or spring. At this meeting we can provide parents with support for helping their ELL students stay on track in school and make progress in their language development. We can also survey parents regarding their interests in continuing education, job counseling, and ESL classes which we can help arrange for them. During this event, we will also make ENL teachers available for individualized meetings to discuss the progress of individual students with their parents. Our meetings will be conducted in Spanish and led by one of the bilingual members of the TBE/ENL Team. All members of the ENL team and the TBE team are bilingual Spanish/English, so individual parent meetings can also be conducted in the parent's language of choice. If we have non-Spanish speaking parents in attendance, we will use the DOE's translation and interpretation hotline to ensure that this parent has equal access. We may schedule an individual one on one meeting with these parents, so that we can meet during a time when the interpretation hotline is open and focus solely on their needs and questions. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents often participate in PA meetings and family events that we hold at school such as holiday family dinners and dances. All of these meetings are conducted bilingually in Spanish and English. At our yearly parent orientation meeting, we tend to get low parent turn out (usually 25% of all ELL parents are present). We hope to use our Title III funding to develop more programs which bring parents into the school, perhaps by offering ENL classes or other job support programs in house. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lauren Reiss, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Evergreen Middle School School DBN: 32K562 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lauren Reiss Title Principal Claudia Harris Assistant Principal Nancy Soto Parent Coordinator Tamara Del Rosario ENL/Bilingual Teacher Veronica Manzo Parent Gesai Abadia Teacher/Subject Area Blanca Guerrero Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Lucila Macias School Counselor Sheila Gorski N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 8/2/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K562 School Name: Evergreen Middle School for Urban.. Superintendent: ShielaGorski The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kendra Miller ELL Coordinator no yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents register their children at I.S. 562K, they fill out their emergency blue card which indicates the language in which they'd like to receive written and oral communication from the school. Parents registering within the DOE for the first time also complete the HLIS survey which indicates their preference for oral and written communication with the school. Our community is largely Spanish speaking, and when going over blue cards, and following student orientation meetings, we have recognized that a large percentage (almost 50%) of our parents prefer and need written and verbal communication from the school in Spanish. In addition, we have a few families who speak Arabic and Haitian Creole at home. We're aware of these families as the students are ELLs, and through the home language identification reports in ATS. With this knowledge, we make every attempt to provide these families with translations of written materials in their native language, and if necessary, a translator during parent teachers conferences or the use of "Language Line" for over the phone translation. 2018-19 CEP 67  Lastly, all of our students have a homeroom teacher. These teachers are a primary point of contact for the students' families. If a family is unable to understand oral or written communication from the school, the student can speak with their adviser, and let them know that their parent or guardian needs a written translation or an interpreter present for any sort of school meeting or event. We currently have a school-wide phone log where school staff log all of their interactions with parents/guardians. We will add a page to this log that includes a report of the students organized by class and grade which includes the languages that the parents' preferred language for communication. Additionally, we have families in our school community who speak the following languages other than English at home: Arabic and Haitian Creole. We provide these families with written notifications in their language of choice by using DOE provided letter templates or google translate, which we recognize is not a perfect translation. We also use the Translation and Interpretation Hotline (Language Line) when calling families or for in person meetings as needed. Often, families that are not English or Spanish speaking bring another friend or relative to help assist in interpretation. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Arabic N/A 235 247 3 0 49 50 1 0 236 246 3 0 49 50 1 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish, Arabic Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 68 Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated by Spanish-speaking staff. Low incidence languages provided translation through contracted DOE translation service language line. Translated by Spanish-speaking staff. Low incidence languages provided translation through contracted DOE translation service language line. Translated by Spanish-speaking staff. Low incidence languages School calendars (monthly) monthly Notification of parent meetings, events, awards ceremonies, reminders about days off, etc. (at least twice per month) Notification/Invitation for special programs: before school phonics, Achieve Now Academy after school program, clubs, sports, etc. once or twice per year 2018-19 CEP 69  Notification of state testing March provided translation through contracted DOE translation service language line. Translated by Spanish-speaking staff. Low incidence languages provided translation through contracted DOE translation service language line. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 CEP 70  6 th grade Welcome Night/Middle School Orientation (once per year) ELL Parent Night and Workshop (once or twice per year) IEP Orientation Night (once per year) Our school has an open door policy, therefore, we have parents in for informal meetings multiple times per week. once per year once or twice per year Parent Teacher Conferences (four times per year) 4 times per year ELL Parent Orientation (once per year) once per year Translated by Spanish-speaking staff. Low incidence languages provided translation through contracted DOE translation service language line. Often these meetings occur in Spanish, with the help of teacher, dean, guidance counselor or parent coordinator interpretation. We also make phone calls home every day for a variety of reasons, thus numerous parent phone calls are made each day by our school staff. Often these meetings occur in Spanish, with the help of teacher, dean, guidance counselor or parent coordinator interpretation. We also make phone calls home 2018-19 CEP 71  every day for a variety of reasons, thus numerous parent phone calls are made each day by our school staff. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Spanish speaking staff members or use of Language Line over the phone service Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Based on knowledge of our school's community, the blue cards, HILs forms, and anecdotal information from staff and families, we're aware of those who needs translated materials or interpretation services. During the first two staff days in September, the staff will been notified via email and in school-wide meetings, that many of our students' parents are Spanish-speaking, and that there are many staff members, teachers, and volunteers who can translate for meetings, phone calls, or written communication. Our Parent Coordinator, Nancy Soto, is also bilingual (English/Spanish), and assists staff members and families in communicating in their preferred language. During the first two days of school the LAC will review the regulations and explain that teachers should seek out staff or hotline when necessary rather than having students translate for their parents. For our families who speak languages other than English and Spanish, all staff members will be provided with the translation hotline number, and have been made aware of google translation services, and are encouraged to make every attempt to communicate with a family in the language that is most comfortable for them. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have the Welcome Poster prominently displayed in our school lobby. We also have a language ID guide at the security desk, the main office, the school secretary's office, and the ELL Coordinator's office. The Parents' Bill of Rights is distributed to parents annually. 2018-19 CEP 72  Our school safety plan includes procedures for notifying parents who speak other languages than English of any issues within the school. In addition, parents have received the DOE Discipline Code translated in the language which they speak. Notifications regarding the school's safety and evacuation plans as well as preparedness drills have been sent home in English and Spanish as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are surveyed in their specified home language. We also survey parents of ELLs on their needs and additional services that are available to them. These surveys are printed in multiple languages. We will also organize a focus group comprised of parents from different language and cultural backgrounds that are represented in our school to gather feedback on how we may better support and serve them. 2018-19 CEP 73 
