2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K564 School Name: BUSHWICK COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: LLERMI GONZALEZ 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Bushwick Community High School 333200010564 School Number (DBN): 32K564 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 10-12 School Address: 231 Palmetto St. 3 rd floor, Brooklyn, NY 11221 Phone Number: 718-443-3083 Fax: 718-919-0781 School Contact Person: FurwaJawad Email Address: fjawad@mybchs.com Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Llermi Gonzalez Christopher Williams Sylvia Haynie Llermi Gonzalez Madeline Lopez Joshua Gonzalez Kelsey Rudon GeovanniMullings District Information Geographical District: 32 Superintendent: Paul Rotondo Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: (646) 654-1261 198 FORSYTH STREET, New York, NY 10002 PRotond@schools.nyc.gov (646) 654-1742 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North FSC Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Room 501, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 935-3954 Fax: 718-935-4314 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Llermi Gonzalez Christopher Williams Antonia Delgado Alice Herdigian Rosa Jaquez Joshua Gonzalez Ashley Delgado GeovanniMullings SylviaHaynie Jasmine Toro DamarisSantiago Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent/PA Recording Secretary Member/ Parent/PA Treasurer Member/Parent Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/ 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Bushwick Community High School (BCHS) is for students to become empowered for positive social transformation and liberation. We educate and inspire our students to positively transform themselves, their local communities and their world at large. Graduates of our school will be critical, analytical and independent thinkers. They will become lifelong learners who have an awareness of, as well as a dedication to, their own cultures and the cultures of others. 2018-19 CEP 8  BCHS is organized around our conviction that college should be encouraged for ALL our students, and, therefore, every student should be thoroughly prepared for this challenge with a rigorous academic program. We emphasize the preparation of ethically and socially responsible leaders who strive to meet the highest standards. BCHS also provides highly personalized guidance and support. We help students to transfer their personal liberation to the community as a whole. Through creating a safe, caring and disciplined environment with a culture of high expectations and through forming personal bonds of trust and respect with the students, BCHS succeeds with students at achieving their educational goals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bushwick Community High School (BCHS) serves 17-21 year old students that require additional supports to earn a high school diploma. BCHS is different from other transfer High Schools in that we accept all students who apply to our school without reservation. This makes our population truly unique because 85% or more of our students are overage and under-credited. Through a safe, caring and disciplined environment, a culture of high expectations, personal bonds of trust and respect for students, a curriculum of social justice, and college and community partnerships, BCHS succeeds with students where their previous schools have failed. Our strongest partnership is with our community-based organization, St. Nick’s Alliance, and their Learning to work program. LTW is an in-depth job readiness and career exploration program designed to enhance the academic component of select Young Adult Borough Centers , transfer schools, and GED programs. The goal of LTW is to assist students in overcoming obstacles that impede their progress toward a high school diploma - and lead them toward rewarding post-secondary employment and educational experiences. Learning to Work offers academic support, career and educational exploration, work preparation, skills development, and internships. The LTW initiative is not a separate program from those educational options; rather, it is an integral component of the academic program at each site. The Learning-to-Work Program is designed for Bushwick Community High School students in order to provide them with an empowering environment to develop strengths and skills, explore opportunities and grow as lifelong learners. The LTW program seeks to provide educational reinforcement, college and career assistance and career readiness through quality work in various paid internships. LTW combines these elements to help BCHS students build positive work habits; increase knowledge of specific career fields; gain leadership experience; develop life skills; and attend periodic health awareness seminars and LTW-sponsored events. Our school’s strength lies in the relationships we build with our students. Our focus on students' social-emotional well being is evident in our student orientations, the relationships that are built between students and staff, our family/mentoring program, and academic support structures. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a transfer high school and a school for transformation, all of our students fit into one cohort needing special academic and social-emotional attention. This year we would like to pay closer attention to students who need extensive remediation in ELA and/or math and students who are at or above grade level who need access to college-level courses. We also want to continue to focus on the supports we continue to provide our students with disabilities and our ENL population, as these students receive individualized attention from dedicated staff whose mission is to provide them with the supports they need to be successful in our school. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 CEP 9  BCHS offers a curriculum that is both interesting and relevant to the lives of our students. Traditionally, students fail to see the connection between what happens in the classroom and what occurs in their own worlds. Outside of school, the world is not neatly categorized into subject areas for an allotted period of time. Our curriculum demonstrates relevancy in the lives of our students. In an effort to make the curriculum alive and valid, connections are made between what happens in the classroom with what happens once our students’ lives. This is an authentic education, an education with real world applications. Our curricula builds on our students' cultural background rather than attempting to lump them together or counteract them. Curriculum development is a coordinated, building-wide strategy. We believe that the curricula in many of our students’ former schools has been a powerful contributor to the failures of our students. Our school community is united by genuine caring and commitment to each other and our common purpose. Each member should exhibit respect and concern for others and be supported and encouraged throughout their time in our school. These values are reinforced through a curriculum that respects students’ ethnic and cultural identities, our house/family structure, school wide town hall meetings and special events. BCHS has a one of a kind curriculum. BCHS not only teaches the core fundamentals of high school academics but also strives to enrich our students with an awareness of culture, community and leadership. By engaging students with topics and issues that directly influence their lives, teachers spark a desire to learn in our students. With a mostly African American and Latino population, teachers address cultural and community concerns and apply them in their lesson plans. As a result, students excel in their classes because there is a genuine interest and what they learn directly applies to their personal realities. The elements of the framework that the school made most progress on were on rigorous instruction and supportive environment. We were successful in the training of staff and implementation of two of Judith Hochman's writing strategies to address sentence complexity and paragraph writing. As a result, we were successful in implementing a variety of assessments that focused around writing. In addtion, we were successful in evaluating the literacy and math skills of all our new students and programming them for classes that address students' literacy and math needs. This year our key areas of focus will continue to be increase critical thinking through writing. We will achieve this by focusing on writing strategies across the curriculum, and developing protocols for feedback and revision across content areas. 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K564 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 263 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 83.7% % Reduced Lunch 7.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 67.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.92 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 43% 21% 23.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 61 33 55.7% 0.4% 31.6% 30.8% 0.0% 0.0% 4 40% 7.4 N/A N/A 48% 27% 38.7% 0% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our review of multiple data sources from our writing inquiry team and our assessment team indicates that our students need additional support in writing complete sentences and effective paragraphs. They also struggle in completing multi-step tasks. Further review of student writing samples in comparison to those of students in traditional high schools reveal a large gap between the writing skills of our students and that of students who are college ready. Our school is strong in analyzing data and implementing scaffolds that support students in completing tasks. However, we need to prioritize the area that we focus on because our plan of action is not yielding results we want that span across classrooms and beyond high school. As a result, the focus on teaching students how to write more effectively and how to create more complex sentences will help us better prepare students for post-secondary writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least one new teacher from each core department will implement our teacher created annotation strategy CUBANS in their classes that address their reading comprehension and therefore addresses students ability in writing complex sentences/paragraphs. We will measure the impact of these strategies by tracking student progress toward literacy standards in our department inquiry teams. 2018-19 CEP 12  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  One teachers from every department will receive Professional Development on implementing CUBANS by October 31, 2018 A minimum of 1 teacher per department (total of 5) will teach students how to implement the CUBANS strategy as part of a close reading strategy Departments will meet biweekly to look at student work and assess student implementation of the CUBANS strategy for common selected reading assignments Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? AP Tutti Touray and department heads Christopher Williams and Tutti Touray. Staff will receive professional development beginning in September. We will begin implementing this strategy on November 4, 2018. Department heads and Tutti Touray We will begin implementing this strategy on November4, 2017. One teachers from each department Our target population for our inquiry work will be at least 10 students with 75 % or better attendance from the classrooms where the strategy is implemented Our target population for our inquiry work will be at least 10 students with 75 % or better attendance from the classrooms where the strategy is implemented Four Departments will create common assessments that will be used to monitor student progress towards writing a complex Our target population We will begin implementing Department heads and Tutti Touray 2018-19 CEP 13 paragraph using information from charts/political cartoons/ and/or written piece. this strategy on February 1, 2019 for our inquiry work will be at least 10 students with 75 % or better attendance from the classrooms where the strategy is implemented 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Some of the assignments will be tied to the preparation of students for college and career readiness. We will invite families to read the articles and provide their own feedback in the assignments so that they are aware and engaged in what students are learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our funding for teacher training (PD), the hiring of educational consultants, to purchase binders/portfolios of all students, and for staff per-session to standardize department templates. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student portfolios will be used to monitor progress for each component we are implementing. We will specifically look at the data from our January midterm assessment created by the department to measure whether students are using CUBANS in their close reading and to measure the increase in complexity between the baseline assessment and this assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim writing assessments will be created as to measure progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 14  2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Quality Review and PPO visits both highlight the supportive school culture that exists in our school. Safety data reveals that there has been only 2 fights in our school in the last 12 years. Our school family structure has helped preserve the positive relationships that exists between staff and students, and student to student interactions. Some of our school strengths in this area come via: ● Our student orientations that are conducted for each enrollment period ● Our family/mentoring structure where each student is assigned a mentor ● Our great support staff, such as our social work and guidance team, are available to support our students’ social emotional needs. ● We have weekly intervention meetings with the entire staff ● We have an assistant principal of interventions that leads our support staff Our needs encompass: ● Providing more opportunities for students to have access to college/post secondary institutions ● Providing students with opportunities to know where they are academically and supports for improvement ● Revamping our family structure for a structure that further supports and develops relationships between all stakeholders in our community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 50% of our students enrolled in the mentoring course who have an attendance average between 65 and 75% will increase their attendance by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). At least 4 teachers will receive professional development on Restorative Justice Circles. All instructional staff will receive professional development on Trauma and Brain development All students will receive common lessons on rules and how they should conduct themselves. On a biweekly basis, teachers teaching the mentoring class will teach a lesson from the Restorative Justice Curriculum Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Andres Cruz, Christopher Williams, Stephanie Solorzano, and Jesi Zinn Santa Calderon, Damaris Santiago, and Anita Morales Our returning and New students during 5 and 6th period All staff July 31 to August 4, 2018 August 29-30, 2018 Bi-monthly beginning September 7, 2018 All students First two days of classes, in September 2018 Beginning September 5, 2018 Students in the mentoring course periods 4-7 Our Assistant Principal of Administration Christopher Williams, Andres Cruz, Stephanie Solorzano, Jesi Zinn, and Furwa Jawad. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 17  Parents will be informed of the mentoring course and the restorative justice curriculum. They will receive a pacing calendar and weekly updates. Parents will be invited to join a support group using restorative circles that meets 2 times a month with Damaris and Santa Calderon. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need funding to support the professional development activities outside of staff work schedule. Funding will also be used to hire additional staff, so that those running the program have additional time to meet with students during the day. Funding will also be used to provide additional resources to support the Restorative Justice curriculum. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 21, 2019 students in the target population should have achieved an increase in attendance of at least 2% from the previous year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be using individual student RESI reports to assess progress Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school uses common planning time as a means for teachers to collaborate with each other in improving components of the Advance rubric (3B and 3C), and share best practices that are aligned with our instructional program. Teachers also collaborate once a week for 1hr and 20 minutes by engaging in professional development that is created by our PD committee with collaboration from the entire teaching staff. Though this work addresses the deficiencies that exists in instruction, the results of this work does not clearly translate in a consistent change to teacher practice. Our strengths in this area are: ● Teacher teams meet weekly to assess lessons and student work collaboratively ● We have a protocol for analyzing lesson plans and student work products ● Through common planning time, teachers share best practices ● Our weekly PD meetings after-school are led by a committee that focuses on the collective and individual needs of staff Areas of improvement include: ● Common understanding of the important components of a lesson plan and how to increase the rigor of these components ● Include peer visitations and feedback sessions as a way for teachers to give each other feedback on the implementation of the lessons discussed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all new teachers will participate in at least 3 cycles of professional learning focused on analyzing data and teacher practice on the implementation of our school wide reading comprehension strategies 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Use the Rigor and Relevance framework for inter-visitations to provide feedback to our colleagues. All teaching staff Principal, Assistant Principal of Instruction , and UFT staff developer We will review this protocol by November 1, 2018 and will implement it by December 15, 2018 Create a system, such as a calendar, to organize visitations. The system should include the ability for teachers to choose a date, what they want feedback on, and their lesson plan so that feedback is aligned with lesson objectives. Individual teachers who are being peer-observed. The system/calendar will be created by September 15, 2018. Principal, Assistant Principal of Instruction , and UFT staff developer Create a common planning time schedule to debrief with visited staff about the observations made during the visit and supports for areas of improvement. Each of the 4 content area departments After the 2 nd round of observations, analyze the data collected during the instructional rounds to drive the professional development that occurs during common planning time and after school. All teaching staff Principal, Assistant Principal of Instruction , and UFT staff developer Principal and Assistant Principal of Instruction. The Common planning time schedule will be created by September 15, 2017 These areas and staff should be identified by October 31, 2017 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will invite parents for learning walks to our classrooms at least 2 times during the school year. Tutti Touray and Llermi Gonzalez will be responsible for facilitating these walks. We will have a learning walk in December 2017 and another in April 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need to create calendars for all components of the peer visits and debrief sessions. We will have to survey teachers on areas of strength and growth. We will also need to develop the protocols needed to keep the work focused on writing and the indicators of rigorous assessments in this school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 30, 2018 we would gather feedback from all parties involved to make adjustments in the observation cycle. By December 20, 2018 we will evaluate the effectiveness of the strategy by comparing multiple ratings for individual staff visited for component 3c and 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher level MOTP reports will be used as the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon review of the latest Quality Review feedback, PPO visit, and classroom visits, teachers need further professional development in components 3B and 3D of Advance. These components are a priority of our focus because they are critical in engaging students in critical thinking and are driven by strategic planning on the part of the teacher. In addition, these components are the centerpiece of our data-driven instructional program. Professional development provided thus far has given teachers an opportunity to understand each component. We are still focusing on building capacity by engaging teachers in self-evaluation and reflection. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 1, 2019, at least 5 teachers will show improvement in their ratings in domains 3B and/ or 3D as a result of 2 cycles of collaborative non-evaluative visitations made by the instructional team which is led by the principal. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? By October 1, 2018 the principal will have staff complete a self-evaluation of their practice using Advance and help identify areas of development All Staff, primarily teachers and APS By October 21, 2018 all teachers will be observed by the principal and instructional AP to provide feedback from Multiple perspective All Instructional Staff Teachers who sign-up for visitation By November 1, 2018 The principal will institute informal support visits to staff who sign-up for this type of visitation. These visitations will not be evaluative and will be conducted by the principal, UFT staff developer, and the instructional AP. Feedback provided will be driven by the analyses of student work from former ELLs and SWDs. By February 1, 2018 teachers involved in these visitations will have at least 1 informal observation that is evaluative. The feedback provided will be driven by the progress of students in our graduation cohort. Teachers will inform parents of specific academic goals set by students in the cohort and how parents can help them achieve said goals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal and assistant principal of instruction Principal and instructional AP Principal, Instructional AP and Staff developer. Reflection will occur between September 21 and October 1, 2018 We will begin this by October 1, 2018 and finish by November 1, 2018 Visits will begin November 4 and run through May 1, 2019 Students in our graduation cohort and their parents This will be ongoing beginning February 1, 2019 Teachers that are part of the visitations, lead evaluators, and the guidance team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will invite parents for learning walks to our classrooms at least 2 times during the school year. Tutti Touray and Llermi Gonzalez will be responsible for facilitating these walks. We will have a learning walk in December 2018 and another in April 2019. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This activity will require a shift in our “formal” observation cycle to allow for the visitations and the in-class support. We will use our funding to provide targeted PD and seminars for teachers based on the data gathered from the visits. This activity will also drive our professional development on Mondays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, at least once cycle of visitations will be complete. Teachers should have had an improvement in at least one component (3B or 3C). A comparison of the informal observations and the non-evaluative feedback will take place to address areas of growth for both the teacher and the process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher level MOTP reports will be used as the instrument of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school traditionally has a hard time involving parents in school events and curricula. According to parent association meetings, most parents feel that their child needs less intervention because they are 18 or older. As a result, we see poor participation in the Parent Association and in school events. An analyses of student performance data clearly indicates that students whose parents are more involved with the school, have more success, both academically and social-emotionally. As a result, our focus is to increase parent involvement. What the school does well: ● Provides parents with incentives for their participation in family events such as Open School Night, Meet and Greet night, and Parent Association participation. ● Provides parents ongoing access to five support staff members consisting of guidance and social workers. ● Informs parents, through a variety of ways, of school events and ways to monitor their child’s progress. What the school needs to improve: ● The school needs to engage parents more consistently on what students are learning ● The school needs to engage parents in more frequent post-secondary planning The school needs to provide parents with the tools to frequently monitor their child’s progress towards established goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 25, 2019 we will have at least 5 parents participate in our newly formed parent/guardian support group. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents new to the school will receive a parent orientation using a Restorative Justice Circle. All parents of incoming students We will meet with parents two times a month on Saturdays using Restorative Justice Circles. This will be our parent support group. All parents of enrolled students Intake Team (social workers, guidance counselors, Parent coordinator, and other support staff. Parent Coordinator Parents will be informed of required parent workshops beginning September 2, and ending with last orientation on by October 31, 2018. Families will be informed beginning September 15, 2018. We will have at least one outside community organization visit the support group to provide parents additional support. All parents of enrolled students Beginning November 1, 2018 Furwa Jawad and Geovanni Mullings Parents will be developing, with the aid of staff, their own goals aimed at helping their child succeed. All parents of incoming students Intake Team (social workers, guidance counselors, Parent coordinator, and other support staff. Parents will be informed of the required goal setting workshop beginning September 30, 2018. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  St. Nicks Alliance and Morningside Center for Teaching Social Justice Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need funding to train staff in Restorative Circles and to run the parent support groups on Saturday. We will also need funding for resources that parents may need that arise from the support group meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 28, 2019 we will evaluate the impact on parent participation on our school community through parent surveys relating to the Support group on Saturdays. We will also keep track of attendance hoping to at least have 5 parents who consistently attend the support group on Saturdays. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance records to our events and activity surveys will be used to measure progress towards these goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 27  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Provided to students based on their current IEPs, annual and/or triennial review. Also provided to students who are not achieving proficiency in their June or January regents, and mid and end of term in class assessments. Mathematics Provided to students based on their current IEPs, annual and/or triennial review. Also provided to students who are not achieving proficiency in their June or January regents, and mid and Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● One-on-one tutoring during the day ● After school tutoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) All services are delivered in Small groups, one-to-one when indicated, and tutoring when indicated. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All services are provided during the day, unless indicated by the activity description. ● Collaborative Team Teaching in ELA ● Academic support classes during the day ● Castle Learning online assessment and student-directed Regents practice ● BCHS PM school ● College Prep course prepares students for college level courses ● Development and introduction of a blended learning instructional program ● Foundational math course provided during the day ● Goemeter sketchpad during class time All services are delivered in Small groups, one-to-one when indicated, and tutoring when indicated. 2018-19 CEP 28  end of term in class assessments. Science Provided to students based on their current IEPs, annual and/or triennial review. Also provided to students who are not achieving proficiency in their June or January regents, and mid and end of term in class assessments. ● After school tutoring ● Tutoring before and during the school day ● Collaborative team teaching in Integrated Algebra 2 ● Castle Learning online assessment and student-directed Regents practice ● BCHS PM school ● Academic support classes during the day ● Regents prep courses provided during the day as electives for all ● Collaborative team teaching in Math ● Regents prep courses provided during the day as electives for all Collaborative team teaching in Math ● Tier II and III vocabulary instruction ● Tutoring before, during and after the school day ● BCHS literacy plan strategies in all content areas ● Performance task assessments focusing on key skills All services are delivered in Small groups, one-to-one when indicated, and tutoring when indicated. All services are provided during the day, unless indicated by the activity description. 2018-19 CEP 29  Social Studies Provided to students based on their current IEPs, annual and/or triennial review. Also provided to students who are not achieving proficiency in their June or January regents, and mid and end of term in class assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Provided to students based on their current IEPs, annual and/or triennial review. Also provided to students who are ● Castle Learning online assessment and student-directed Regents practice ● BCHS PM school ● Tutoring before and during the school day Tutoring before and during the school day ● BCHS literacy plan strategies in all content areas ● Performance task assessments focusing on key skills ● Castle Learning online assessment and student-directed Regents practice ● BCHS PM school ● Use of Examgen Wizard to build and customize assessments for individual students ● Use of Smartboard clickers to collect classroom data (Senteo) ● Tier II vocabulary instruction ● Each student to receive regents review books to use in school and at home ● All cognitive testing for students with IEPs ● Schedules all triennials for students with IEPs. All services are delivered in Small groups, one-to-one when indicated, and tutoring when indicated. All services are provided during the day, unless indicated by the activity description. All services are delivered in Small groups, one-to-one when indicated, and tutoring when indicated. All services are provided during the day, unless indicated by the activity description. 2018-19 CEP 30  identified in needing those services by the intervention team. Organizes the meeting of general education teachers, special education teachers, students and parents . ● Affective evaluation for students with IEPs ● write goals and makes recommendations for students with IEPs ● We have two social workers who tackle issues such as childcare, court cases, health and housing that may prevent a student form coming to school and being academically successful. We have onsite HIV testing, blood drives and a representative from the Department of Health here every Wednesday to talk to students about sexual health. For our parents we offer workshops on sending their child to college, paying for college, computer literacy and job hunting. For our students who are parenting (and for students who are engaging in behavior that will make them parents) we have purchased Reality Works. The Reality Works system provides life-like babies for students to 2018-19 CEP 31  carry and take care of to simulate realities and stresses of parenting. ● Parenting group weekly counseling for at least 30 students ● Referrals to outside services for 10 students per month ● HIV Testing ● STD Testing ● Pregnancy testing ● Medical referrals for: Options Counseling, Health Insurance Processing, Dental/Vision, Psychiatric, Mental health Services, Asthma, Pediatric referrals, etc. ● WIC ● Day Care 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have 6 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We are planning to interview students to identify specific areas that they need support in so that we could use the funding based on their individual need. In addition to this, we will be supporting these students with weekly one-on-one counseling provided by one of our three social workers. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 33  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP 34  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have a hiring committee that puts new teachers through a rigorous hiring process that includes group interviews and modeling lessons. Students and staff are involved in the hiring of new staff. In addition, all new teachers have to attend professional development in various areas that are required in order to help our students progress in our school environment. In order to ensure we have HQT we will assist any teachers who are working outside of their license to obtain appropriate credentials through coursework. We will also utilize our network as a resource for offering support along with our individualized PD plan to assist all teachers in acquiring the necessary pedagogical skills needed to be considered HQT. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We provide all of our teaching staff with professional development and support centered around Advance. Staff receives consistent feedback on their progress and additional PD opportunities to enrich different components of the teaching rubric. We provide all teachers with the support they need, whether it’s instructional or organizational, to support their teaching practice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 CEP 35  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school is centered around data-driven instruction. As a result, the use of assessments to drive data is critical. Teachers work with the Assistant Principal of Instruction, our school’s professional developer and with their colleagues at department meetings to create baseline, interim, and summative assessments. Teachers receive feedback from three different sources before the assessments are implemented. In addition, assessment results are analyzed as a group during common planning time, in order to use assessment results to drive instruction. Professional development is driven based on the analysis of assessment results and is customized towards the needs of the students and the individual teacher’s strengths and weaknesses. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X 12, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 22. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 185,931.00 2018-19 CEP 36 0 0 0 2,001,359.00 X 12, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 22. Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 2018-19 CEP 37  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bushwick Community High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bushwick Community High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 39  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 2018-19 CEP 40  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bushwick Community High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP 41  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 CEP 42  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2018-19 CEP 43  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 44  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name Bushwick Community High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 564 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Llermi Gonzalez Coach Christopher Williams ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher type here Teacher/Subject Area Jesi Zinn Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Assistant Principal Ebony Singleton Coach type here School Counselor Millie Lopez-Martir Parent Sylvia Haynie Parent Coordinator Furwa Jawad Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 205 2018-19 CEP 45 Total number of ELLs 07 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.41%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? BCHS uses NYSESLAT diagnostic and in class assessments to assess the literacy skills of our students. We also use achieve 3000 literacy assessment to determine at what reading levels the students are currently performing. Students also take a literacy test upon entering the school. BCHS uses all of this data to set goals for each student and to inform instruction 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a literacy committee who reviews this data and creates action plans for students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP 46  We evaluate our programs by reviewing student portfolios, which include student goals, reflections, and data. We also use a literacy assessment that was teacher-created. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The literacy committee meets bi-monthly to look at student work, discuss literacy strategies, measure progress, and make adjustments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a transfer school grades 10-12. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns reveal that our ELLS score lower in the reading/writing modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The literacy committee meets bi-monthly to look at student work, discuss literacy strategies, measure progress, and make adjustments. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our program is a self-contained ESL program. The program model is ungraded and homogenous. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All of our students scored an advance on the NYSESLAT. As a result, every student receives 230 minutes per week in ESL, ELA and NLA instruction as per CR Part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We only offer an ESL program based on parent choice. Content areas are delivered using a variety of strategies to support ELLs. All content areas are common core aligned and support strategies are implemented aimed towards helping ELLs achieve Common Core learning standards. Content is also delivered using Empower 3000 to help improve literacy. Instruction that is scaffolded and differentiated is utilized to meet the needs of our ELLs in the content areas. 2018-19 CEP 47  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All students are given the opportunity to take their assessments in either their native language and in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Historically we do not have SIFE, newcomers, or ELLS receiving service 4 to 6 years. Historically our students are long term ELLs. We differentiate instruction for this subgroup by assessing students in the 4 different modalities and giving them a learning styles survey. Instruction is differentiated based on the results of such assessments and the results of their daily work. In addition, students have access to Empower 3000, Ilearn, and tutoring that focuses on differentiated learning for ELLs. Our former ELLs are giving extented time and other testing accomodations based on the assessment they are taking for up to 2 years after they score a proficient on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We do not have ELL-SWDs. Students identified as ELL-SWDs have their IEP and NYSESLAT modalities assessed in addition to the testing we conduct for all of our students registering to our school. ELL-SWDs are place in appropriate classes based on their IEP recommendation/accomodations and their proficiency level. Historicall we have differentiated instruction for these students via the analyses of their entry level assessments. We also provide these students with access to Compass learning and Empower 3000 for access to grade level materials. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All students are placed in ICT classes and removed from self-contained settings. Our Special Education teachers' schedules are flexible to meet the needs of our students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. To have students reach proficiency, in two years, explicit instruction is taught on reading, listening, speaking and wrtitng. This year, we will continue the strategies outlined in the BCHS literacy plan, continue to provide professional development on differntiation and provide instruction to ELLs using the SMART board. ELLs will continue to be tutored after school by all of their content area teachers when necessary and will be eligible for PM school and Saturday school. Description of Strategies Used in Mathematics and Science □ Reinforcing math and science skills through games □ Ecological approach/generating data from real life experiences to use in class □ Problem solving instruction and task analysis strategies to target reading and writing skills □ Use of native language support □ Teacher “ think-alouds ” to target speaking skills □ Graphic organizers such as semantic mapping, Venn diagramming and concept mapping in word problems □ Explicit vocabulary building and random, recurrent assessments to target writing skills □ Adjusted speech to target speaking skills □ Daily re-looping of previously learned material □ A response journal to target listening and writing skills □ Pre-teaching vocabulary to target reading skills □ Summarizing what was learned at end of each lesson (e.g., a journal summary) □ Using pre-reading strategies in content areas □ Teaching Greek and Latin prefixes and suffixes to target reading skills 2018-19 CEP 48  □ Using response cards during instruction to answer teacher questions to target listening skills □ Specific informal assessments based on curriculum (Curriculum-Based Probe) □ Using pictures to demonstrate steps to target speaking □ Use of technology and Media (Ipods, Video Cameras and film-making equipment/software, TI 84 Graphing Calculators, Smartboards with Senteo Handheld Interactives) □ Use of simplified texts to target reading and writing skills Description of Strategies Used in English and Social Studies Create a Welcoming Language-Rich Environment with Opportunities for Immediate Success • Labeling classrooms to target reading skills • Showing respect for the cultures of our ELL students by introducing their home countries and cultures to the class as a whole. If possible, learning Spanish, our students’ native language • Praise ELL students for what they can do. Creating frequent opportunities for success even if it is simple task • Speaking slowly and clearly in simple sentences at first, but never distort language to improve speaking and listening skills. □ Building on ELL Students' Prior Knowledge and Teaching Essential Vocabulary • Use organizational activities such as semantic mapping, KWL, timelines, and other strategies to determine where the students stand in relation to the content of the upcoming lesson. • Whenever possible provide ELL students with a list of essential vocabulary a day or two before the introduction of a new lesson so that the students can use a simplified English or bilingual dictionary to learn the meanings and familiarize themselves with the words. This approach also helps students identify prior knowledge about the topic from their native languages. • Use oral pre-reading activities and allow time for discussion and questioning before assigning academic reading assignments to ensure that ELL students have the background information and linguistic skills necessary to accomplish the assignment. □ Explain cultural assumptions and use culturally relevant material whenever possible. • Textual information often relies on cultural assumptions and information that ELL students will most likely not have. It is necessary to provide and interpret explanations wherever needed. • Personalized and culturally relevant examples should be included where appropriate. • When teaching a unit on the American Civil War, for example, start the class by looking at the concept of conflict in general and have ELL students give examples from their own backgrounds or countries. □ Use a variety of visual aides and teach to all learning styles. • ESL students benefit greatly from visual clues to help them get meaning from "context reduced" material. • Visual clues may include facial expressions, gestures, pictures, charts, graphs, maps, etc. • Teaching to various learning styles, important to all learners, is crucial for ELLs. • Graphic organizers are particularly helpful in allowing ELL students to plot complex material visually. □ Lighten the Linguistic Load by simplifying grammatical structures and paraphrasing. To lighten the linguistic load: • Limit sentences to one concept. • Use the active voice, not the passive voice. • Use concrete examples and contextualize. • Use the subject-verb-object pattern for most sentences. • Write a summary of the lesson in a simpler form of English. • Simplify the vocabulary, retaining key concepts and essential technical vocabulary. • Use repetition. When giving directions to beginners use the same structures every day. For example don't say, "Open your book to page 39," one day and switch to, "Turn to page 39," the next. □ While teaching content, classroom teachers help students increase their English proficiency by: • modeling the pronunciation of difficult words in the lesson; • emphasizing word meanings and idiomatic expressions; • emphasizing base grammatical structures that are necessary to understand and discuss the content area material; • creating a classroom climate where students feel comfortable making mistakes and taking risks. □ Teach interdisciplinary thematic units whenever possible • Thematic units across disciplines help ELL students make connections and achieve a deeper understanding of concepts. They also serve to reinforce new vocabulary. 2018-19 CEP 49  □ Design curricular units for depth rather than breadth • In both social studies and science curricula the emphasis is too often on “covering material” instead of clearly understanding concepts in depth. Spending more time on truly learning fewer concepts enhances the chances of success for ELLs. □ Actively teaching study skills and metacognitive tools • Students need to realize that textbooks are organized differently than literature books or basal readers. Students need to be aware that textbooks are written to inform, not entertain. • Point out the most common patterns of textbooks: Cause/effect, compare/contrast, time order, simple listing, descriptive and problem/solution. • Encourage students to use available text features: captions, glossary, index, study questions, table of contents, footnotes, marginal notes, use of bold type and italics, etc. • Categorizing and providing them with a short list of words pertinent to the lesson and let them categorize the words. For Social Studies the categories could be people, places, things and events. Set students up with buddies to help get started. • Create an outline of the topic for the ESL students using simple grammar. Cutting up the outline and putting it back together increases familiarity with the topic and helps in learning sequence • Continually have students reflect on how to find meaning in textbooks and other reading materials. Teach skills such as skimming, summarizing, and looking for main ideas. □ Use Hands-on Activities. • Experiential activities are of great importance to students not proficient in the language of instruction. ESL students can be actively involved. • Present information both verbally and visually. • Include experimentation, measurement, construction, graphing, chart and mapmaking, etc. □ Modify the ESL Students' Assignments, Assessment and Testing • Continually monitoring our students' progress. Formal and informal assessments are necessary to see whether students show comprehension of the material being taught. • Vary the levels of the questions being asked according to the students' current level of speech production. • Provide as many opportunities as possible for ELL students to demonstrate their skills and knowledge in different ways including drawings, keyword outlines, graphs, etc. □ Use of Cooperative Learning. • Studies have shown that ESL students benefit greatly from cooperative learning experiences. • ELL students work more efficiently with a buddy or in a small group. • Include ESL students in heterogeneous group work even if their comprehension is very limited. RESEARCH HAS SHOWN…THEY ARE GETTING SOMETHING. Strategies for All Disciplines: School Wide effort □ Developing reading skills. Giving language learners many opportunities to read and write in meaningful contexts. Draw on effective strategies for increasing literacy skills. Integrating technology to support writing instruction and motivate students to use written language to communicate. □ Working from strengths. Building on what students already know. Drawing on their background experiences and encourage connections between academic concepts and students' own lives. Help students see the value of being able to communicate in multiple languages. □ Connect with students' families and culture. Use culturally congruent teaching methods. Incorporate culture and native language, introduce multicultural literature, and draw on the expertise of community members. Give ELL students opportunities to teach others about their first language and home culture. □ Use engaging instruction. Use effective strategies such as project-based learning, thematic instruction, and cooperative grouping to engage learners. Give students opportunities to talk about shared learning experiences. Hands-on, experiential learning experiences will develop understanding. Help ELL students connect words with meaning by using nonverbal clues and nonlinguistic 2018-19 CEP 50  representation of ideas, including multimedia, manipulatives, simulations, and modeling. □ Vary assessment strategies. Use wide-ranging assessments, including observations, portfolios, and performance assessments. Program Description: Attendance Improvement for ELLS 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are trying to tailor online learning environments to our ELLs. Instructional supports in their native language is needed so that they can take advantage of advacing the amount of credits they can take per semester. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs are offered to ELLs. ELLs are encouraged to take part in all programs offered. After school programs and services offered to ELLs include after-school credit bearing classes, tutoring, sports, and clubs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classroom lessons are offered using a smartboard. All ELLs have access to in class laptops and a student computer lab. Classrooms contained in class mini-libraries with culturally relavent readings chosen by students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is delivered in our ESL program through a self-contained Native Language class and through the content area teachers. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support and services are tailored towards the 17-21 age group. Because we do not have grade levels in our school, supports is customized based on individual student need. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classroom lessons are offered using a smartboard. All ELLs have access to in class laptops and a student computer lab. Classrooms contained in class mini-libraries with culturally relavent readings chosen by students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All ELLs must attend a series of orientations designed to support the students' transition into the school. Workshops include and are not limited to culturally responsive learning, community service, Empower 3000, Google apps for education, and pupilpath. In addition, foundation classes in literacy and other content areas are provided to students in the summer and thoughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently are not offering language electives as our students are overage and at risk of dropping out. We offer courses and supports that students need to earn a high school diploma. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 2018-19 CEP 51  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Most content area teachers that have ELLs have been trained in the Teaching Basic Writing Skills curriculum by Judith Hochman. The training focuses on helping emerging writers develop the necessary skills to develop sophisticated sentences, paragraphs and essays. To support teachers in the teaching of literacy to ELLs BCHS uses strategies outlined in the BCHS Literacy Plan. The BCHS Literacy Plan is a guide for all teachers to provide them with guidelines and strategies to better support and incorporate high standards of literacy into their instruction. The guide spells out ways to approach both reading and writing in the classroom. It is designed to help teachers emphasize these skills with their students. By implementing the specific instructional strategies outlined in the plan, our approach to literacy instruction will become more clear and consistent throughout the school. This consistency will improve our students’ skills as readers and writers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers of ELLs receive professional development focused on data driven instruction through the lens of rigor and culturally relavent pedagody to engage students in the common core learning standards. Teachers also receive professional development in differentiated instruction on a regular basis. These professional development seminars support teachers in meeting common core-aligned instruction by increasing rigorous instruction with the use of scaffolding activities that allows students to complete common-core aligned assessments and tasks. Our Assistant principal, Special Education coordinator, and Staff developer coordinate professional development sessions in groups and work individually with teachers to ensure differentiation for ELLs and all students. At various times per year during our intakes, staff as a whole review the academic data of our ELLs with the help of school leadership. This is possible because only 3% of our students are ELLs. At these sessions, we look at their assessment results, attendance data and anecdotal information to determine best instructional supports/strategies and next steps for each ELL. More than 7.5 hours of professional development is planned based on the findings we make during our intake analyses. Records of these professional development activities are kept by our school's staff developer in our UFT teacher center. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are invited to various meetings throughout the year to discuss goals of the program, student progress, and assessment results. Parents are also involved in student action plans to ensure support at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Because we service older students who are 17-21 years old, parental involvement is limited in many ways. Many of our parents take on a very laissez-faire approach to their children who are technically adults. In fact parental involvement remains a major 2018-19 CEP 52  challenge for our school, not just for our ELLs but for our general population. With this challenge, we persist in increasing parental involvement in the following ways: 1. A bi-yearly parental luncheon. 2. Parent workshops on computer literacy, job hunting, college and careers for their child, obtaining a G.E.D and supporting their child academically. 3. Parent incentives for involvement, parent awards, the PTA, School Leadership Team and Parent-Teacher conferences. 4. Parents are called daily if their child is absent. 5. Parents are invited up for a meeting with all of their child's teachers during case counsels. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP 53 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Llermi Gonzalez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 54  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Llermi Gonzalez Title Principal Ebony Singleton Assistant Principal Furwa Jawad Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sylvia Haynie Parent Jesi Zinn Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Christopher Williams Coach Coach Millie Lopez-Martir School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/21/17 10/21/17 10/21/17 1/1/01 10/21/17 10/21/17 1/1/01 10/21/17 1/1/01 10/21/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 55  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32K564 School Name: Bushwick Community High School Superintendent: LaShawn Robinso The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Before a student is enrolled in the school, parents meet with the Parent Coordinator and a Social Worker for an admissions interview. Part of this interview requires parents to indicate both their written and oral language preference. Language preferences are recorded on the student emergency contact cards and shared via a google document so that all members of the school community have access to the language preference for both written and oral communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 56 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English and Spanish are the preffered languages of communication . 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Admissions/intake forms Attendance Contract Parent Association Invitations Announcements regarding our Meet and Greet events and Parent-Teacher Conferences Overview of student curriculum Graduation Requirements After-School and Saturday programming 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Admissions/Intake meetings: September, October, and February provide interpretation service(s)? 2018-19 CEP 57  Parent-Teacher conferences: September, November, February, and April Meet and Greet Night: September and November Attemdamce Meetings: Various Times throughout the month from September to June College Application Information Sessions: October, November, December, and February 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All required parental notication for translation and interpretation services are contained throughout various areas of the school. The main office provides parents with the Parent's Bill of Rights in English and Spanish. Proper signage is displayed at the entrance of the school building, including a Welcome Poster in both English and Spanish and the available translation and interpretation services parents have access to. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 58  Written surveys and feedback from parents conducted during the social work interview of our admissions process and during various events where parents come face-to-face with school staff are some of the mechanisms used to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services provided by the school. 2018-19 CEP 59 
