2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 17K568 School Name: BROWNSVILLE ACADEMY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: CAROL YING 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Brownsville Academy High School 331700011568 School Number (DBN): 17K568 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 10-12 School Address: 1150 East New York Avenue – Brooklyn, NY 11212 Phone Number: (718) 778-7305 Fax: (718) 778-7385 School Contact Person: Melissa Ingrati Email Address: Mingati@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Carol Ying Karl Plummer Gail Durrant SLT Chairperson: Ketisha Peters & Cristina Green Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Gail Durrant Aleke Scarlett Seon Straker Durrant Eric Figueroa District Information Geographical District: 17 Superintendent: Paul Rotondo Superintendent’s Office Address: 1150 East New York Avenue –Brooklyn, NY 11212 Superintendent’s Email Address: Protondo@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (646) 654-1261 Fax: (718) 778-7385 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn South Executive Director: Dr. Mauriciere deGovia Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn South 9 Executive Director’s Email Address: mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (646) 256-3092 Fax: (718) 759-3909 2018-19 CEP 3  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carol Ying Karl Plummer Gail Durrant Thelma Lyle Gail Durrant Aleke Scarlett Seon Durrant Ketisha Peters Christina Green Venus Conner Patricia Grant Gaylene Durrant *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ School Counselor Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ 2018-19 CEP 4  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 5  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 6  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 7  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Brownsville Academy is a school community dedicated to providing a renewed experience for all scholars to excel in college, careers and life. We aim to do this through a safe, nurturing, academically rigorous and scholar centered environment. Our goal is to foster compassionate, independent thinkers who achieve academic excellence through problem solving, exchanging of ideas, collaboration with others, service, and internships. Mission Statement Brownsville Academy High School - Another chance to become who you are meant to be. 2018-19 CEP 8  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. About Us… Brownsville Academy High School (BAHS) is a Diploma Plus transfer high school for scholars who are awaiting an opportunity to unleash their full potential in a small high school setting. Diploma Plus is a highly successful model for scholars who have not had success in traditional comprehensive high schools. Diploma Plus was developed by the Center for Youth Development and Education (CYDE), a Massachusetts corporation dedicated to workforce development and education reform. In September of 2004, Brownsville Academy High School opened in New York City as the first Diploma Plus School. We currently serve over 120 over-aged, under-credited scholars who have fallen behind their cohort in regards to credit and Regents accumulation. Scholars at Brownsville Academy High School are provided with an opportunity to accelerate their credits in a scholar-centered environment via BAHS’s competency-based, thematic curriculum that is aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. In addition, Brownsville Academy is an elite Innovation Zone School (iZone). The iZone provides scholars with an opportunity to learn in a blended classroom, where they take courses online while learning from expert teachers. Since BAHS’s inception, scholars have consistently achieved notable passing rates on their Regents examinations. In addition, the caring, dedicated staff is familiar with and attentive to the developmental needs of young adults and offers engaging, interdisciplinary projects based on the individual needs of each scholar. We are happy to share that most recently; we have been selected as a Community School. As a part of this new Mayor’s initiative, we have the opportunity to further support our scholars and our community by providing health and wellness programs that will not only cater to the needs of the whole scholar, but to their families as well. To support the school’s culture and to meet the needs of diverse learners, we have incorporated a range of teaching and learning methodologies, including project-based learning, inquiry-based approaches, differentiated instruction, higher order thinking and specific skills development strategies. To foster a supportive environment, each scholar participates in a Leadership class which is similar to an Advisory program. However, at Brownsville Academy High School the goal of Leadership is to empower scholars to become independent thinkers, clear communicators, and effective problem-solvers who are prepared to meet the challenges of adulthood. In addition, scholars are supported through the relationships that they have with their Scholar Advocates who serve as their “parents” in the building and whose role is to follow up with scholars regarding attendance, punctuality, academics and their social-emotional health. Further, there is a strong portfolio culture in which scholars demonstrate what they know and are able to gain recognition for their academic achievement. To prepare our scholars for college and the real world, they are required to enroll in the College Now program where scholars receive college credit at one of the following participating institutions: Brooklyn College, John Jay College of Criminology, Medgar Evers College or New York City College of Technology. Scholars also complete an internship with our Community Based Organization, The New York City Mission Society through the Learn to Work initiative, and create a Portfolio comprised of exemplary work, accomplishments and awards they have received while attending our illustrious institution. Lastly, scholars must participate in a community service project. There is a multitude of extra-curricular activities the scholars are engaged in within the school, including our basketball team, track team, Student Council and the elite group of Ambassadors. In addition, our scholars are also involved in many extra-curricular community service activities, such as a voter registration drive, Breast Cancer, Diabetes and AIDS Walks, and the Model United Nations Program. At Brownsville Academy High School we foster an atmosphere of excellence throughout our courses of study, community and school based activities and scholar support systems. These are just a few accomplishments and activities available at Brownsville Academy High School. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ELLs, SWDs, Over-aged and Under-credited students, economically disadvantaged students 2018-19 CEP 9  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2018-19 academic year, we plan to broaden the horizon at BAHS by continuing to drill deeper into our instructional focus of “If scholars can determine the meaning of words and phrases to analyze texts, then this will inspire effective scholarly discussions." While we have made significant progress in each area of the Framework for Great Schools, the three areas we would like to highlight are, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family-Community Ties. BAHS is celebrated for our excellence in the area of building school culture. It specifically speaks to our school’s ability to “establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations.” 2018-19 CEP 10  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K568 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 117 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 2 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 52 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.5% % Reduced Lunch 0.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.6% 12.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 34% 21.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO No N/A 13 11 69.3% 6.0% 22.2% 82.9% 0.0% 4.3% 2 0% 8.6 N/A N/A 55% 47% 62.5% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 CEP 11  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One key component of the 2014-2015 Citywide Instructional Expectations is to “Ensure curricula are aligned to standards in all content areas. (QI 1.1, 2.2)” It states that “Students will: Experience rigorous instruction. (QI 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 3.4) and Learn content by engaging with standards-aligned curricula in all content areas.” It further demands that “Teachers and teacher teams will: Shift classroom practice. (QI 1.2) This goal was developed to align with the CIE’s requirement that “In all grades and content areas, plan and teach lessons and units that integrate the literacy and math Common Core instructional shifts where appropriate”. The New York City Department of Education framework for teaching components used in the current teacher effectiveness program is adapted from Danielson’s 2013 rubric. The rubric states the following: To the extent that the CCLS deal with what students should learn in school so they will be prepared for college and careers, the biggest implications are in the areas of curriculum and assessment. Educators and policymakers must revise their curricula and their classroom and district assessments, and must locate instructional materials to support the new learning. There are some specific additions made to the rubric language to bring it into complete alignment with the CIE; those have been added, particularly in the following domains: Domain 1—1e: Designing Coherent Instruction, and Domain 3—3b: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques, 3c: Engaging Students in Learning, and 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. According to the 2014-15 Quality review rubric’s Curriculum and Pedagogy indicators, full integration of the CCLS is required. It reads: 1.1 Shift in language from State Standards and integration of the Core Learning Standards (CCLS) aligned “units of study” to the “use of curricula” that reflects full alignment to CCLS Inclusion of “access to curricula and tasks” to reflect UDL or similar framework for curriculum refinement. 1.2 Inclusion of “instructional shift” to reflect the connection between full CCLS implementation and classroom instruction and to align with the CIE. Performance trends reflect an increase in the level of writing per the ELA writing rubric as a result of the incorporation of the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP 12 CCLS SL.9-10.0 states that teachers will “propel conversations by posing and responding to questions that relate the current discussion to broader themes or larger ideas; actively incorporate others into the discussion; clarify, verify, or challenge ideas and conclusions.” Addressing the noted items will continue to increase the level of rigor in classrooms and provide meaningful and engaging experiences for scholars in the classroom. An analysis of New York State Regents results from June, 2017-2018 revealed that the percentage of students who were proficient in US History increased from 13% – 56%, in Living Environment, they increased from 18% – 25% , in Global History and Geography, they increased from 17% – 19%, in ELA, they decreased from 33% – 22%, and in Algebra I they decreased from 22% - 10%. Our strengths throughout the year included Professional Development on rigorous instruction such as questioning and discussion techniques; assessment in instruction; student engagement; and Data Driven instruction. We developed a school-wide inquiry approach where each Department implemented the inquiry cycle to look at student work, analyze data from frequent formative assessments, and create next steps for pedagogical practices that provided multiple entry points for all scholars. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will develop and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques resulting in an increase of one level according to the Advance MOTP (Measure of Teacher Practice ) Score Tracker from component rating 2 to component rating 3 under category 3b “Using questioning and discussion techniques." 2018-19 CEP 13  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be provided with the Common Core Learning Standards, Danielson’s framework for teaching, DOK Chart and Hess’ Matrix to assist with differentiation to address the needs of all scholars including advanced scholars, ELLs and SWDs to increase the level of rigor in the classroom as measured an increase in the pass rate on preliminary and benchmark assessments. Teachers Specific teacher teams with core content area will develop Rigorous Learning Tasks. For College and Career Readiness teachers will utilize Socratic Discussions to support the work. Teachers Teachers will participate in Department Team meetings 2-3 times per week with the support of school leaders Teachers Teachers will review curriculum maps, unit plans and scholar work products for evidence of alignment and make adjustments as needed based on data from frequent formative assessments. Parents will be made aware of changes to the curriculum via letters home and during PTA meetings. Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Department Chair, Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Department Chair, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Department Chair, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Department Chair, Teachers Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be supported in their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core through workshops, where parents will receive an overview of the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will explain the relationship between the standards, curriculum maps and ultimately lessons. Follow up will be provided as a part of the weekly parent outreach, PTA meetings and Parent-Teacher Conferences. The time line will be from September 2018 until June 2019. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator and Lead Teacher. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will also be used to provide teachers with internal and off-site professional development. Programming resources will used to create common planning time and assignments to teacher teams. Personnel and resources that will be used to implement the strategy include: • Principal and Assistant Principal • External Professional Development Services will be provided • Per session for Inquiry Team meetings • Substitute coverage/Per Session for teachers to meet in department meetings to assess scholar work and use the data to inform instructional practice • plan lessons that allow scholars to demonstrate their understanding of the prioritized competencies and related learning standards and conduct inter-visitations to monitor the effectiveness of the lesson • Professional Development texts will be purchased for the Professional Development Center • Teachers will participate in Professional Learning Communities • Teachers will attend PD outside of the school building • Borough Centers support will be brought onsite as needed • Teachers will be made aware of on line resources such as ENGAGE NY, ELA Scope and sequence, Social Studies Scope and Sequence, Next Generation Science Standards and the common core library Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The implementation will begin in the Fall of 2018 and conclude in the Spring of 2019 with a mid-point check in the form of a written benchmark assessment for non-regents courses and a Regents aligned assessment for Regents based courses during the month of January 2018. Students will also be assessed based on their progression on the school-wide discussion rubric continuum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance MOTP (Measure of Teacher Practice ) Score Tracker, Regents Scores, Pass Rates per Trimester Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2014-15 Citywide Instructional Expectations, “The work of schools is to support students to demonstrate academic and personal growth, achieve at their highest levels, and be afforded opportunities for college and career participation. The success of that mission depends on a school’s ability to know its students well.” As a transfer high school, supporting the needs of over-aged, under-credited scholars, it is our responsibility and mission to teach the “whole student” through re-engagement, making personal connections with scholars and building a supporting culture within our school community. It is through the personal relationships that adults have with students that we will see an improvement in attendance and academic outcomes. Although we were celebrated as being "Well Developed" in the area of School Culture. It is an area in which we will continue to focus based on our attendance data for 2017-18 which reflected 70% attendance for the school year. It is our goal to foster relationships among scholars and staff member to increase attendance by 2% for the school year. According to the Learning Environment Survey, 96% of our students feel safe in their classes and at their school. BAHS is a community school and we work with CAMBA to address cultural awareness and the impact it has on student progress. Scholars have access to guidance counselors, social workers, SAPIS worker and CAMBA staff , so they can address their concerns freely without fear of repercussion from staff or other students. We will continue to focus on school culture as it relates to scholar attendance. It is our goal to foster relationships among scholars and staff member s to increase attendance by 2% for the school year. According to the 2014-15 Quality review rubric’s Assessment and Goal and Action Plan indicators, It reads: 1.4 Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectation In 2018-19, school leaders will ensure that systems and structures are in place so that each student is known well by at least one staff member. It is the responsibility of that staff member – or a team – to be able to clearly articulate the student’s development, including how a student is progressing as an individual, as a learner, and as a member of the community in order to coordinate student support services and to advocate for that student. Schools will strategically align their work, including their instructional focus, professional learning, and related supports based on regular assessment of student strengths and needs. Knowledge of students will emerge through the systems and structures employed by the school, including student conferences, family communication, the individualized education program process, English language learner program selection process, academic and personal goals for students, and guidance and support services for students. Schools will regularly examine evidence and monitor impact of this work throughout the year in order to refine practices that best support knowing students to ensure their growth and success. Student performance trends reflect an increase in the class pass rate of 7% for scholars after being connected to a scholar advocate or other adult in the building. There has also been a 2% increase in attendance. Achieving this goal will help us to improve student outcomes as a result of their ties to the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 16  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 100 % of Scholars (including students with disabilities and ENLs) will have a personal relationship with at least one adult in the building based on iLog, Pupil Path, New Visions Heat Map and CAMBA data leading to an improvement in attendance and academic outcomes based on ATS and STARS data by June 2019 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The work of the C-FAST (Community, Family, Administration, Staff and Teacher) team will be strengthened as a means of pulling together all resources both inside and around the school community to support scholar academic success. -Partnership with BRIC arts will offer educational and other vital programs through the arts to enhance relationships and school morale. -Partnership with Ramapo help scholars to learn to align their behaviors with their aspirations. Other programs include: -Momemtum Education - coaching -Urban Yogis/Brain Power - wellness mentoring -Queen Geniuses - wellness mentoring -PSAL - sports -Road Runners - sports -Monthly Activities for parents and scholars -Superbowl parties The team will identify and utilize community resources that will support scholar college and career readiness. Parents will be kept abreast of all college and career opportunities via mail, telephone calls, parent conferences and PTA meetings. College Access For All program Additional College trips Post secondary opportunities The Community Associate will serve as one of the leads on the Attendance and Recruitment team, to support the development of the team throughout the school-year. Collaboration with CAMBA - Open-Houses (6) - Recruitment Fairs - Home Visits - Daily phone calls All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Professional development time will be allocated towards the C-FAST Team meeting with the Inquiry Team to target specific All Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Advocate 2018-19 CEP 18 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 All Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Advocate Counselors, Scholar Advocates, Pupil Personnel Team, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Community Based Organization, Parents Principal, Assistant Principal, Advocate Counselors, Scholar Advocates, Pupil Personnel Team, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Community Based Organization, Parents Principal, Assistant Principal, Advocate Counselors, Scholar Advocates, Pupil Personnel Team, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Community Based Organization students and develop strategies to support their academic achievement Counselors, Scholar Advocates, Pupil Personnel Team, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Community Based Organization, Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment by having an open house at the beginning of the school year that will inform students and parents of the social/emotional supports that are provided within our school community, as well as resources that we can connect parents to, outside of the school community. Supports may include but are not limited to academic supports, mental health supports, social/emotional supports and community resources. Our school community also has a food pantry which can provide an additional layer of support for families that may be in financial distress. The time line will begin September 2018 and conclude in June 2019. Responsible personnel include the Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Associate, Community Schools Director and the PPT. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel and resources that will be used to implement the strategy • Principal and Assistant Principal • Pupil Personnel Team • Community Based Organization • Scholar Advocates ● Community Schools Coordinator and Staff ● Advocate Counselors ● Parent Coordinator ● Pupil Personnel Team ● Community Associate Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The implementation will begin in the Fall of 2018 and conclude in the Spring of 2019, with a mid-point check in during the month of January 2019. Benchmark assessment, Regents and STARS data will be utilized to monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 19  iLog   Pupil Path  ATS -RSAL Report  New Visions Attendance Tracker  CAMBA - Student Interaction Tracker  STARS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers will adjust their practice as they work together to understand the learning needs of all scholars, including students with disabilities and English language learners. This will support scholars in developing the qualities and skills necessary to enroll, persist, and succeed in college and careers. The curriculum is aligned to the Common Core learning standards by infusing additional informational texts into all subject areas; although scholars were discussing articles and essays, they were not citing specific evidence from the text to support their ideas thus, the need to develop specific goals around supporting scholars to that end. According to the 2014-15 Quality review rubric’s Teacher teams and leadership development and Monitoring and Revising Systems indicators. It reads: 4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. 5.1 Evaluate the quality of school-level decision, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the CCLS. Our instructional focus is “If Scholars can determine the meaning of words and phrases to analyze texts, then this will inspire effective scholarly discussions.” Because our scholars must be able to read, analyze, cite and defend their ideas, in writing and discussions, writing utilizing evidence is a skill that will ensure they are working towards attaining that goal. Feedback from our Quality Review indicated that we should “Enhance questioning techniques and discussion strategies to improve student thinking and participation. In order for student performance to improve, it is important that the instructional practices of teachers improve student thinking and participation leading to evidence based on discussions. While performance trends reflect scholars moving up at least one level on the writing continuum, it is our goal to move scholars who have been identified as level one at least two levels to prepare scholars for the written component of the ELA Regents exam. To achieve our instructional focus, teachers must collaborate in teams to ensure that instructional practices within our school community require scholars to go beyond discussing the general ideas in a text, and push them to defend their ideas citing specific textual evidence, which can lead to rich text-focused discourse. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 100% of classroom teachers will implement an inquiry cycle in teams to analyze data from frequent formative assessments, provide multiple entry points to all scholars, to improve student outcomes,. This will allow for rigorous and coherent curriculum appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards in all content areas, with a focus on the inquiry cycle that provides the data which will drive instruction. The inquiry will support the 2018-19 CEP 21  instructional focus of “determining the meaning of words and phrases to analyze texts, and inspire effective scholarly discussions.” 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be provided with the Common Core Learning Standards, Danielson’s framework for teaching, DOK Chart and Hess’ Matrix to assist with differentiation to address the needs of all scholars including advanced scholars, ELLs and SWDs to increase the level of rigor in the classroom. Teacher Teams Sept 2018 - June 2019 School leaders will facilitate team meetings, participate in team meetings and provide feedback to teachers and parents Teacher Teams Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will share scholar work products with members of their department for feedback and identify gaps in scholars’ knowledge or skill to inform the revision of the tasks and make instructional adjustments. Teacher Teams Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will develop rigorous assessments that are aligned with the Common Core learning standards and keep parents abreast of any changes to the curriculum. Teacher Teams Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Coach, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Coach, Teacherss Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Coach, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Coach, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator will be the primary source of outreach for parents to keep them apprised of all school related activities and supports. Parents will have an opportunity to gain an understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies through the Pupil Path program where parents can access up to the minute information on their child regarding attendance, conduct and academic standing. In addition to the monthly parent-teacher meetings, a workshop will be provided to parents each trimester that will focus on strategies that can be implemented at home to support student outcomes. The start date will be October 2018 with an end date of June 2019. Key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher and Department Chairs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 CEP 23  Resources will also be used to provide teachers with internal and off-site professional development. Programming resources will be used to create common planning time so that teacher teams can meet at least 3 times per week. .Personnel and resources that will be used to implement the strategy • Principal and Assistant Principal • Lead Teachers will support teachers • Data Specialist will support teachers • External Professional Development Services will be provided • Per session for Inquiry Team meetings • Substitute coverage/Per Session for teachers to meet in department meetings to assess scholar work, plan lessons that allow Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The implementation will begin in the Fall of 2018 and conclude in June 2019, with a mid-point check in based on the 2019 ELA Regents exam during the month of January 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ELA Regents Writing Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According the Framework for Great Schools, “The principal sets the tone for the school, develops a climate of inclusiveness, and inspires staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement. The goal of a strong school leader is to build coherent instructional and social-emotional support that improves student achievement. School leaders support teacher development by consistently offering professional development opportunities and providing meaningful feedback.” According to the Principal Practice Observation Tool, the following indicators reflect examples of strategies that should be implemented by school leaders to support professional growth, social-emotional health and student achievement in schools: 1.3 Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products a. WD: The use of resources (e.g., budget, space, technology, coaches, partnerships) and other organizational decisions are well-aligned to and support the school’s instructional goals and long-range action plans, as evident in meaningful student work products b. WD: The use of staff time is structured such that teams have substantial and regular meetings that are deliberately structured so that teachers’ professional responsibilities align with the school’s instructional goals, focusing teacher time on instructional work and resulting in improved instruction that engages all students in challenging academic tasks c. WD: Hiring practices, teacher assignments (e.g., total student load, effective teachers placed to close the achievement gap), and student program groupings and interventions, including those for ELLs and SWDs, are strategic, promoting access to college and career readiness as well as accountable collaborations among faculty so that groups of teachers hold themselves accountable for their students’ progress 4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning a. WD: The vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that have strengthened teacher instructional capacity and promoted the implementation of CCLS (including the instructional shifts), resulting in school-wide instructional coherence and increased student achievement for all learners b. WD: Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused, resulting in shared improvements in teacher practice and mastery of goals for groups of students c. WD: Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school Performance trends in teachers have reflected an increased level of rigor in the level of questioning per Danielson's Framework, Bloom's Taxonomy and Hess' Matrix of Cognitive rigor by at least one level on the continuum. To ensure that we are progressing towards meeting our school’s instructional goals and to further promote professional collaborations that will improve student outcomes, the principal, in collaboration with the professional development team will develop a data driven, Danielson and Common Core aligned professional development plan that clearly communicates the instructional vision, builds teacher capacity and prepares scholars for the rigors of college and careers. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The principal and school leaders will provide weekly professional development and facilitate a school-wide inquiry team which focuses on the implementation of the school-wide instructional focus of “determining the meaning of words and phrases to analyze text, inspiring effective scholarly discussions. ” to improve the graduation rate by 5% by June 2019. 2018-19 CEP 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will provide teachers with the Common Core Learning Standards, Danielson’s framework for teaching, DOK Chart and Hess’ Matrix to assist with differentiation to address the needs of all scholars including advanced scholars, ELLs and SWDs to increase the level of rigor in the classroom. Teachers School leaders will facilitate team meetings, participate in team meetings and provide feedback to teachers Teachers Teachers will share scholar work products with members of their department and school leaders for feedback and identify gaps in scholars knowledge or skill to inform the revision of the tasks and make instructional adjustments Teachers School leaders will support teachers in the development of rigorous assessments that are aligned with the common core learning standards Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Professional Development Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Professional Development Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Professional Development Team Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, Professional Development Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All parents will be informed of the inquiry process and the systems in place to identify student areas for growth and how those areas will be supported. The parents of students who have been identified for inquiry will be contacted individually via telephone and mail to provide them with more specific information about the inquiry process. The Parent Coordinator, PTA President and members of the SLT will actively work to identify parent leaders and engage them in developing resources to support parents. The principal also has an open door policy for parents to ask questions or offer concerns. The time line will begin in September 2018 and end in June 2019. The key personnel will include the Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teacher, PTA President, Parent Coordinator and SLT. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will also be used to provide teachers with internal and off-site professional development. Programming resources will used to create common planning time and assignments to teacher teams. .Personnel and resources that will be used to implement the strategy • Principal and Assistant Principal • Lead Teachers will support teachers • Data Specialist will support teachers • External Professional Development Services will be provided • Per session for Inquiry Team meetings Substitute coverage/Per Session for teachers to meet in department meetings to assess scholar work, and determine instructional next steps. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The implementation will begin in the Fall of 2018 and conclude in June 2019 with a mid-point check in during the month of January 2019 based on observation reports and MOSL data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -MOTP Data from Advance -ATS RGCS Report -DOE Scholarship Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. It is our belief that when scholars feel connected, they become more involved and when they feel more involved, they will want to be present each day. As a school community, we understand that the experiences that our scholars have do not begin and end in our building. We have a clear understanding that their families, their life experiences and their decision making are strongly connected to the communities in which they live. As a component of that community, it is our goal to initiate and commit to the work of building relationships and partnerships within our community. It is by building strong ties to the community that we will be able to tap into the resources that could help our scholars to successfully complete high school and transition to college, careers and beyond. The ATS RASL report reflects a decrease in attendance of 6% between the 2014-15 and 2016-17 school years. Performance trends have shown an increase in student pass rate and attendance based on family and community involvement. The increased level of parental involvement has resulted in a 2% increase in attendance. It is our goal to continue to engage family and parents to meet and surpass previous attendance benchmarks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Brownsville Academy High School in collaboration with CAMBA and the United Way as a part of the Community Schools Initiative will conduct monthly workshops that will build strong family and community ties thus increasing attendance for scholars with (at risk, chronically at risk, severely chronically at risk) attendance by 5%. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Engage scholars in relevant student activities as a means of reducing absenteeism and building relationships between each scholar in the building with an adult in our school so that the scholar will always have a direct connection and line of communication with a member of the school community. Develop a specific plan to address absenteeism for scholars in each categories -at risk -chronically at risk -severely chronically at risk We will do this through: -Focused all school initiative where the school staff would serve as success mentor (adoptive a scholar) for the scholars with poor attendance. -New Scholar Orientations every month beginning in September -Conducting home visits twice a week -Conducting daily phone calls -Using consultants to bring programs based on scholar interest -Back To School Week activities -Kid Talk between the Pupil Personnel Team and Teachers & Check ins with advocate every Tuesdays -Continuing to utilize Skedula as a means of communication between parents and the staff -Regularly meeting with teachers to provide strategies for improving attendance The C-FAST Team (Community, Family, Administration, Staff, Teacher) which will include the parent or guardian, Principal, Community Schools Director, SLT member, CBO member, teacher and Community Partner to discuss strategies to support the scholar and to provide the necessary resources to make their transition back into the school community as seamless as possible. Parents will also help to identify best practices as a part of the C-FAST Team Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Scholars Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, CAMBA, United Way, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, School Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor, Scholar Advocates Counselors, College Counselor and Career Counselor All Scholars Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, CAMBA, United Way, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, School Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor, Scholar Advocates, College 2018-19 CEP 30 All Scholars Sept. 2018 - June 2019 -Targeted scholars and parents will receive a FAQ sheet in their “Welcome Back” packets and surveys, which will identify community based and school related resources. -CAMBA Newsletter to highlight accomplishments of scholars and upcoming events. Sections (upcoming events, career, trips, celebration, highlights...) -Monthly incentives and certificates to celebrate and encourage improvement in attendance for scholars and parents. - Using the community businesses to provide incentive programs and strengthen community ties. The Community School's Office and Parent Coordinator’s Office will serve as a hub for parents and community members so that they can gather more information about the school and develop strategies for utilizing that information to improve scholar outcomes. All Scholars Sept 2018 - June 2019 Counselor, and Career Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, CAMBA, United Way, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, School Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor, Scholar Advocates, College Counselor, Career Counselor Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, CAMBA, United Way, Parent Coordinator, School Counselor, School Social Worker, SAPIS Counselor, Scholar Advocates, College Counselor, and Career Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Community Based Organization that will support family and community engagement is CAMBA. CAMBA will support our school community through the Community Schools Initiative. As a component of the initiative, parent and students participate in an annual forum at the end of the school year where a needs assessment is conducted. Plans and school-wide goals are set based on the feedback from parents which informs how academic and social/emotional supports are provided. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. • Principal and Assistant Principal • Community School Director • CAMBA • United Way • Parent Coordinator • School Counselor 2018-19 CEP 31  • Pupil Personnel Team • Scholar Advocates • Advocate Counselors • Attendance Team • SAPIS Counselor • School Social Worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The implementation will begin in the Fall of 2017 and conclude in the Spring of 2018 with a mid-point check in during the month of January 2018 as measured by student outcomes on the Regents exam, preliminary and benchmark assessments.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS - RASL Report New Visions Attendance Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Services include small group instruction, differentiated instruction, in class science literacy and test taking strategies; after school one-to-one and small group tutoring is offered for additional assistance and Regent preparation. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Level 1 and 2 scholars are specifically targeted for academic intervention during the school day. As major exams approach such as the Regents, scholars are provided with additional support on Saturdays, during lunch and after school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYSELA Regents Exam, classroom observations, Formative Assessments; analyzing data from the Inquiry-cycle and the review of their academic history which includes report cards, transcripts, formative assessments and IEPs if applicable. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Scholars are provided with extended periods of ELA courses that are aligned with the Diploma Plus competencies and the New York State Common Core Standards. As a part of the Department-Wide Inquiry Team, the English Department is now implementing “whole group” roll out of the inquiry process in which we not only focus on scholars who struggle in the areas of reading and writing, but apply the same learning strategies to scholars on all levels. Each member of the department also serves as a resource for teachers who may need assistance with best practices for teaching writing and research within their specific content areas. In addition, the English Department continues to 2018-19 CEP 33  Mathematics NYSAlgebra 1 or GeometryRegents Exam, classroom observations, Formative Assessments; analyzing data from the Inquiry-cycle and the review of their academic history which includes report cards, transcripts, formative assessments and IEPs if applicable . Science NYSLiving Environment/Earth ScienceRegents spearhead the Writing and Research Across the Curriculum project which is designed to promote writing and research within all content areas which is believed to be the foundation of academic growth and success. Further, all scholars benefit from our small school community and small class sizes. Strategies utilized include gathering data to inform programming and differentiated instruction in all math classes. Once a scholar is in need of A.I.S, an intervention is put in place which consists of individual conferencing to identify specific areas of need and the development of a plan that is specific to the scholars’ need. As a part of the Department-Wide Inquiry Team, the Math Department is now implementing “whole group” roll out of the inquiry process in which we not only focus on scholars who struggle in the areas of reading and writing, but apply the same learning strategies to scholars on all levels. We have a state-of-the art science lab which will help to We offer additional academic interventions during the school day and after school as needed. Services include small group instruction, differentiated instruction, in class science literacy and test taking strategies; after school one-to-one and small group tutoring is offered for additional assistance and Regent preparation. Further, all scholars benefit from our small school community and small class sizes. Services include small group instruction, Scholars are provided with services as needed 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) differentiated instruction, in class science literacy and test taking strategies; after school one-to-one and small group tutoring is offered for additional assistance and Regent preparation. Further, all scholars benefit from our small school community and small class sizes. After school tutoring, one-to-one, small group and whole class instruction. Intervention strategies also include peer tutoring, and additional interventions during school and after school as needed. Further, all scholars benefit from our small school community and small class sizes. Students meet in small groups or individually based upon their need. Exam, classroom observations, Formative Assessments; analyzing data from the Inquiry-cycle and the review of their academic history which includes report cards, transcripts, formative assessments and IEPs if applicable NYSGlobal History or US HIstory Regents Exam, classroom observations, Formative Assessments; analyzing data from the Inquiry-cycle and the review of their academic history which includes report cards, transcripts, formative assessments and IEPs if applicable . At risk services are provided based on referrals from teachers, parents, advocates, the School Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc. Services are also provided to scholars based on the mandated services outlined in the IEP if applicable. make the learning experiences of the scholars more authentic and allow scholars to make real world connections. As a part of the Department-Wide Inquiry Team. The Science Department is now implementing “whole group” roll out of the inquiry process in which we not only focus on scholars who struggle in the areas of reading and writing, but apply the same learning strategies to scholars on all levels. As a part of the Department-Wide Inquiry Team, the Social Studies Department is now implementing “whole group” roll out of the inquiry process in which we not only focus on scholars who struggle in the areas of reading and writing, but apply the same learning strategies to scholars on all levels. Identified at risk scholars are given individual and group counseling, or a behavioral contract. If issues are too complex for school staff, then scholars are referred to an outside agency. Parent/ guidance conference may be requested if needed. In addition, during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays. Scholars are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch, after school and on Saturdays. Scholars are provided with services as needed during class time, during lunch and after school. 2018-19 CEP 35  our school Social Worker and School Counselors are trained, designated health resource coordinators that give health related information to scholars in regard to HIV & AIDS, STD’s & STI’s, and safe sex through our condom availability program 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently seven (13) Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All Scholars in Temporary Housing receive individual and group counseling, free breakfast and lunch and job placement assistance. Scholars are also provided with resources within the community to assist them with obtaining housing. In addition, scholars are given free metro cards to ensure a smooth transition to and from school and they are provided with necessities as needed such as toiletries, clothing and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At Brownsville Academy High School we believe that teacher quality remains one of the most important school-related factors influencing student achievement. The administrators at Brownsville Academy High School work closely with FSC Human Resources to recruit teachers and to ensure a highly-qualified teacher in every classroom. To continue to meet the State mandate to ensure that we have a highly qualified teacher in each classroom we will a. Advertise extensively b. Recruit teachers locally c. Recruit online d. Recruit from substitute teacher list e. Encourage paraprofessionals and teachers who lack full certification to become fully certified f. Retrain current teachers to teach hard-to-fill subjects (e.g., mathematics, science, special education) g. Attend job fairs h. Interview candidates as a team and require them to model a lesson prior to being hired. I. Retain teachers by involving them in extra curricular activities and teaching courses of interest j. Providing Professional Development to teachers both in-house, through the FSC and through outside sources 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to ensure that current staff becomes highly qualified, we conduct weekly professional development, including bi-weekly department meetings and weekly team meetings, engage in cycles of mini and formal observations and provide teachers with resources to ensure that they are working diligently to become highly qualified. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 2018-19 CEP 39  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet by department to develop content-specific assessments to administer to scholars. Based on data gathered from baseline assessments, and the ongoing Inquiry Cycle, curriculum is adjusted to support the specific needs of those students. Common Core aligned assessments are administered weekly to monitor scholar progress. Adjustments to instruction are made based on data gathered as needed. Our school community has three teams that support the professional development of teachers as it relates to the development of rigorous and informative assessments. Those teams are the Rigorous Learning Tasks Team, the College and Career Readiness Team and the Instructional Focus Team. As assessments are developed, it is the responsibility of each team to review the assessments and provide feedback to teachers based on the team’s area of expertise. Teachers make adjustments based on the feedback prior to administering the assessments to scholars. ??? 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 CEP 40  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 77,515 0 0 0 1,091,150 X X Sections 5A-E Pt. 4b Sections 5A-E Pt. 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 CEP 41  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brownsville Academy High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brownsville Academy High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 43  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 CEP 44  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brownsville Academy High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 CEP 46  ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 47  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community Schools Strategy will be integrated into academic instruction through Extended Learning Time. We have provided robust programming that infuses common core curriculum so that students can receive Physical Education, Art, English and additional elective credits. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The summative goals for the 2018-19 school year are to increase attendance by 10% by June 2019. By taking a proactive approach and working with fewer consultants, we have expanded effective programs to take place throughout the school day and correlate with classes where scholars can receive credit. Programming throughout the day will also allow us to track data effectively. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? ELT: We will use partnered organizations whose programs align with common core curriculum to provide services throughout the day where students can earn credit. Attendance Supports: By using the New Visions Data Sorter we will be able to track data both weekly and monthly to identify the past and present trends to create strategies and create incentives plans proactively. School trips and gift cards will be planned on a trimester basis and advertised to both students and families in advance as a way to bolster attendance. Family Engagement: Monthly resource workshops will be held in partnership with the PTA which includes: housing, financial literacy, health and wellness, and HRA workshops to boost engagement. We will be providing a parent wellness day for parents to learn mindfulness practices and workout in our open gym night. A monthly News Letter will be created to share information with both staff and families to build a stronger PTA. Health and Wellness: Through integrated programming, classes will run on a social-emotional track to partner with consultants to run workshops. Also, through extended learning time PE will partner with Urban Yogis to provide mindfulness practices to students. The school leadership team will also implement a health and wellness team that will collaborate with Urban Yogis to develop staff PD’s around mindfulness practices. The meditation room will also continue to serve as both a counseling space and a space for restorative re-entry circles. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2018-19 CEP 48  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal BRIC ARTS: BRIC Arts will be providing a year-long residency that will be integrated into the school's art curriculum throughout the school day so that students may receive credit. The year-long residency will be broken into smaller art residencies where students will learn skills in mural making, digital photography , animation and silk screen printing Students who need an art or elective credit Urban Yogis: Will be integrated into the school day in PE classes as additional alternatives to gym to facilitate mindfulness practices and yoga. Queen Geniuses: Will collaborate with the DOE social worker to provide social-emotional programming for the Women’s Empowerment group, to offer supports around leadership, trauma, self-esteem and self–reflection. Inner You Project: Will collaborate with the DOE social worker to provide social-emotional programming for the Men of Purpose group, to offer supports around leadership, trauma, self-esteem and self–reflection. Students will be able to identify at least three different wellness techniques to cope with stress by May 2019 Scholars will be able to self-assess by identifying three areas for personal growth, to be able to utilize it towards personal, emotional, and social growth which will be displayed through a culminating community Scholars will be recruited by DOE Social Worker based on interest of receiving group counseling and will follow an Extended Learning By June 2019, Extended Learning/Wellness Health and Wellness Health and Wellness We will have increased the year to date attendance by 2% by providing scholars with alternatives to receiving credits. Students will be able to identify at least three different wellness techniques to cope with stress by May 2019 Scholars will be able to self-assess by identifying three areas for personal growth, to be able to utilize it towards personal, emotional, and social growth which will be displayed through a culminating community project by May 2019. Scholars will be able to self-assess by identifying three areas for personal growth, to be able to utilize it towards personal, emotional, and social growth which will be 2018-19 CEP 49  Food Pantry: The food Pantry will act as a "new market place” for scholars who are in need of food but may not want to shop at an actual pantry. Our population is a transfer school in a neighborhood where many of our scholars do not have access to food. Health and Wellness displayed through a culminating community project by May 2019. We hope that the pantry will allow us to hit our 2% increase by June, by using the pantry as an attendance strategy. application process. Students will be grouped into three categories based on need to each lunch and housing displacement. Group one students will be allowed to shop first during distribution hours followed by other groups. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Time - CBO's Push In, Teachers and Teacher Time, Advocate Schedule, College Tuesday - Push In, LTW Push In for College and Job Readiness Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2. Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. 4. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. This aspect of the work will be leveraged from data collected by the Community School Director through the Community School Forum, focus groups, DOE school retreat, New Visions Data Sorter, and school teams to effectively implement programming and resources for the entire school community. 2. (Question 1. Answer expanded.) This aspect of the work will be leveraged from data collected by the Community School Director through the Community School Forum, focus groups, DOE school retreat, New Visions Data Sorter, and school teams to effectively implement programming and resources for the entire school community.  By meeting with school teams on a weekly and monthly basis data is continuously assessed to identify trends, determine strengths and weaknesses, and identify attendance barriers students may fall in, to carefully determine what resource’s we can connect them too. 3. This aspect of the work will be implemented through the monthly Community Schools Team meeting that will take place the last Tuesday of every month. All staff is encouraged to attend and provide a department share-out to the school community. 4. This aspect of the work will be implemented through the weekly attendance team meetings where staff from every department, including the CBO staff will meet to =effectively discuss and analyze data. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Community Schools and LTW: The lead CBO manages both the Learn to Work and Community Schools Program. Both programs work collaboratively to support and champion ELT through incentives and ongoing data strategy, attendance supports, school culture and counseling. 2. Community Schools Team Committee Ms. Lyle: Activities Team Chair Ms. Peters:Pupil Personnel Chair 2018-19 CEP 51  Ms. Simpkins (AP):Attendance Team Chair Ms. Perez : LTW Director Ms. Green: Guidance Counselor Ms. Williams: School Culture Dr. Marquez Ms. Francis: School Activities Team Ms. Ritter: PTA Ms. Durrant: PTA president (Parent Representative ) Mr. Figueroa ( Community School Director) Principal 3. New Visions Data Sorter: Is used to track weekly and monthly attendance as well as attendance barriers. The team analyzes this data to find patterns and trends in order to successfully allocate resources and find proactive strategies to combat chronic absenteeism. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. In order to implement the Community School program model adjustments will be made in the following areas: Schedule: Leadership classes will follow a social- emotional track in order to accommodate programming for both young men’s and women’s counseling groups. Urban Yogis (yoga group) will be pushed into PE classes. There will be a pedagogue assigned to BRIC Arts throughout the day to supplement art credits. Instructional Resources: will be provided by partnered consultants who will be facilitating workshops in classes Human Resources: The school will provide per session to pedagogues assigned to classes attached to community school programming Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Timeline for Resource Implementation: October 2018 – June 2019 Implementation Timeline: Every last Tuesday of the Month ( Starting Oct. 31st , 2018) Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 52  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Brownsville Academy High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 568 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carol Ying Coach Hilda Ficentise ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Karen Wynn/English Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Christina Kettell/Special Educ Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Nicole Simpkins Coach N/A School Counselor Christina Green Parent Gail Durrant Parent Coordinator Kim Ritter Field Support Center Staff Member Christine Etienne Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 53  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 120 Total number of ELLs 4 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Brownsville Academy High School has always used its in-house assessment to determine the literacy level of our ELL students. This year, we used beginning of the year K-12 skills assessment. We also used a reading placement assessment. The school uses the NYSESLAT results and K-12 skills assessment to assess ELLs. The assessments indicates students overall strength and weaknesses in Phonemic Awareness and reading comprehension. This data helps inform our school's instructional plan by indicating that a significant portion of instructional time should be dedicated to reading comprehension and writing development. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP 54  The teacher providing support for the ENLs works in collaboration with the Special Education teacher to provide supports for the ELL. Data gathered from the assessments are shared with the staff and professional development is provided that involves strategies for supporting ENLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is determined by scores on the NYSESLAT. The movement that students make from one performance level to another over several years is another indicator of the effectiveness of the ELL program. We are clearly focused on the students' scale score and performance level on the ELA regents and Math Regents exams. In addition, classroom progress and student participation is another indicator of the success of the programs for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We look at the program of the students to determine if additional supports need to be added or if layers of structure need to be taken away based on the skill set of the student. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results of the 2015 NYSESLAT indicates that one senior and one of the eleventh graders needs to work on their speaking skills, while the data reveals that the four students in grades 10-12 need to work on all four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. All three students are on an intermediate level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data regarding student progress is disseminated during weekly staff meetings. Meetings are held with individual teachers based on content areas as needed. In addition, information is shared with parents and strategies are offered to the parents for supporting ENLs at home. Adjustments that are made to the program may include, but is not limited to tutoring after school, during lunch and on Saturdays. Students may also be given additional time within their schedule, which adds another layer of support. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The standalone ENL program is implemented by the students being heterogeneously programmed into a class that provided ELL support. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2018-19 CEP 55  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All staff members in the building are given a schedule that notifies the teachers of all ELL students, their proficiency levels, how many hours they are required by the law to be serviced based on their proficiency level, and when they will be serviced. Students labeled as beginners and intermediate receive 360 minutes of instruction per week in pull out method. Advance students receive 180 minutes of instruction in pull out method. The 2015 NYSESLAT changed the classification of English Language Learners. No longer will they be identified as beginners, intermediate, advanced and proficient. Students will now be identified as Entering (formerly beginner), Emerging (formerly low intermediate), Transitioning (formerly intermediate), Expanding (formerly advanced) and Commanding (formerly proficient). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. A certified ESL teacher will provide ESL as required by the student's proficiency level. This will be as a pull out model for the students which will be programmed and scheduled in an alternative setting. One ELL student is proficient in the Reading/ Writing and Speaking section of the NYSESLAT. The other ESL student is proficient in the Speaking section of the NYSESLAT. The ESL teacher provides 180 minutes a week to the advanced students. The ELA mandated units will be provided by the certified ELA teacher. Our school currently has a part-time ESL teacher who provides services to students and collaborate with the ELA teachers to ensure students are receiving adequate support and understanding of strategies and skill taught to improve academic progress. Students receive 4 periods of ESL with a certified ESL teacher and the ELA mandated units will be given to students . 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE Students Although Brownsville Academy HS does not have any Students with Interrupted Formal Education. SIFE students would be assessed to identify weakness and strengths. Individualized meetings with parents to provide them with an individual plan based on the needs of the SIFE student. A complete assessment for these students will be conducted to find out areas of deficiency to help provide necessary teaching and learning strategies. At the same time, we would refine and enhance students' prior knowledge and boost confidence. They would be supported with ESL and Guidance Intervention support services provided by the ESL Teacher and the guidance counselor. Literacy support would be provided in the classroom as well as individual tutoring provided by the ESL Teacher in the student’s native language. The English Teacher and the ESL Teacher would also utilize a collaborative team teaching approach to address the needs of these students. In addition, the following plans are also used: -Making an individualized student needs assessment -Creation of an AIS plan for the student focus on the literay and math component -Grade appropriate instructional support materials -Differentiation of instruction in all areas -Staff will receive professional development by the ESL teacher on strategies that benefit SIFE within the classroom -Professional development will also be offered in the new ALLAD assessment to identify SIFE students -An analysis of their scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessment suggest that their problem is one of reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves: 2018-19 CEP 56  -An after school program, targeting reading and writing -Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. Plan for Special Needs Students Our policy for special needs students includes: -Ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students' particular needs and all services are provided accordingly to the IEP mandates. -Collaboration between the ESL teacher and IEP teacher. -Monitoring newcomer and SIFE student for possible special need status. -The delivery of AIS services after school. Newcomers -When a new student is registered in our school, we provide an informal student orientation and the following resources to facilitate the transition: Newcomers work in pairs with students in the advance language level. Their different cultural backgrounds are considered as assets. Students challenge, support and learn from each other. ----We give newcomers assessments first, then set individual goals for each student and reach them with ESL methodologies. -The APEX online system is used to support instruction. -Having a buddy system where students can identify a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day -Encouraging student to participate in the After School activities -An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention Programs -Home School Communication Long-term ELL -Making an individualized student needs assessment -Additional focus on Reading/Writing are given to Long-term ELL's. -AIS is provided to students -Differentiation of instruction in all areas Former ELLs -ESL teacher push-in students class to provide extra academic support -Students are encouraged to participate in After School activities -Differentiation of instruction in all areas 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers utilize differentiated instructional practices to address the needs of each scholar. The also closely follow the recommendations made within the IEP to ensure that individualized support is being provided. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Special Education Teacher and ELL teacher collaborate to ensure that students are on track toward achieving their goal. The Special Education and ELL Teachers are also members of the S.I.T. team where they are afforded additional opportunities to collaborate to support ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Several different intervention programs and services are in place to support our ELL population. Apex and an additional 150 minutes of instruction is provided to all ELL students every week through Extended Time Instruction. The Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) plan is another form of intervention that is used in the school. The SIOP method is a lesson plan format that is used to support different ELL components. SIOP lesson plans are also used to tie together the different subjects in the school. Many visual, and hands on materials are included in this lesson format. Total Physical Response (TPR) and technology are also regularly used in the lesson. 2018-19 CEP 57  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This school year the ESL teacher implemented the use of Apex program. Which helps students develop the different modalities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no ELL programs that have been discontinued in the school this year 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are given equal access to the different programs that are offered in the school. They are able to participate in everything that is available to any student in their grade level. Students are able to attend the after-school program where they will work on ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies and communication 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology plays a large role in our ESL program. The teacher has access to IPADS, computers and SMARTBOARDs to support ELL students. Apex is a technology based program that used to support students in content and language. The NYSESLAT and Beyond is another program that is used to build students in the different modalities 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The Native Language of our students ia embraced in the ESL program. Different activities celebrating the students' native language are also used in the ESL program. Dictionaries and thesauruses in the students' native language and English are provided to assist the students in the class where appropriate 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The Common Core Learning State Standards and curricula are used to plan instruction and activities in the class. The different activities are differentiated based on the students' ages, grade, level of proficiency and ability 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology plays a major role in our ESL program. The teacher has access to IPADS, computers and SMARTBOARD to support ELL students. Apex is a technology based program that used to support students in content and language. The NYSESLAT and Beyond is another program that is used to build students in the different modalities 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our parent workshop series are offered to all parents who wish to hear information about upcoming events and activities that are planned and set up for the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the only language elective that is offered in the school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP 58  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our Part-time ELL teacher receives professional development through the network. Professional development will be provided to every teacher in our school building on a regular basis by the ESL teacher and principal. All of our teachers will be provided with common preparation periods during which the Principal will engage teachers in study group activities and best practices. These workshops are held on a weekly basis on all areas of the curriculum. The Principal, will also provide the teachers with professional development in Literacy and Mathematics. Differentiated Instruction is embedded in all lesson planning and workshops. Lesson planning, thematic instruction and differentiation of instruction are some of the topics on the agenda. This staff development consists of study groups, modeling instruction and outside workshops. Part of the staff development will take place after school hours during the school year. Our teachers also attend professional development activities provided by DOE and by our FSC. Professional development will be provided by the ESL teacher to Special Education teachers who will receive 10 hours of ELL training and general education teachers will receive the 7.5 hours of ELL training as per Jose P. mandate. Some of the topics include basic ELL background, the school ELL intake, initial language learning (phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary and comprehension instructional strategies), academic vocabulary, childhood and adolescent development considerations, technology- based interventions, co-teaching, joint -ESL and classroom teacher goal setting and monitoring, task complexity, levels of questioning, and using data such as NYSESLAT and periodic assessment data to drive ELL instruction. In addition, teachers will attend workshops offered by DOE, and our FSC. These meetings will inform teachers about the compliance issues, identification of students as well as testing accommodations and strategies for differentiating and supporting ELLs in their classrooms. We hope to have more ELL students come to our school in the next few years and this will be our planning year to prepare a quality program. The school guidance counselor also helps teachers with ELL students. He helps with the transition from high school school to college and beyond by involving their parents in the process of learning which schools best meet their child’s needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A Our Part-time ELL teacher receives professional development through the network. Professional development will be provided to every teacher in our school building on a regular basis by the ESL teacher and principal. All of our teachers will be provided with common preparation periods during which the Principal will engage teachers in study group activities and best practices. These workshops are held on a weekly basis on all areas of the curriculum. The Principal, will also provide the teachers with professional development in Literacy and Mathematics. Differentiated Instruction is embedded in all lesson planning and workshops. Lesson planning, thematic instruction and differentiation of instruction are some of the topics on the agenda. This staff development consists of study groups, modeling instruction and outside workshops. Part of the staff development will take place after school hours during the school year. Our teachers also attend professional development activities provided by DOE and by our FSC. Professional development will be provided by the ESL teacher to Special Education teachers who will receive 10 hours of ELL training and general education teachers will receive the 7.5 hours of ELL training as per Jose P. mandate. Some of the topics 2018-19 CEP 59  include basic ELL background, the school ELL intake, initial language learning (phonemic awareness, Phonics, vocabulary and comprehension instructional strategies), academic vocabulary, childhood and adolescent development considerations, technology- based interventions, co-teaching, joint -ESL and classroom teacher goal setting and monitoring, task complexity, levels of questioning, and using data such as NYSESLAT and periodic assessment data to drive ELL instruction. In addition, teachers will attend workshops offered by DOE, and our Field Support Center. These meetings will inform teachers about the compliance issues, identification of students as well as testing accommodations and strategies for differentiating and supporting ELLs in their classrooms. We hope to have more ELL students come to our school in the next few years and this will be our planning year to prepare a quality program. The school guidance counselor also helps teachers with ELL students. He helps with the transition from high school school to college and beyond by involving their parents in the process of learning which schools best meet their child’s needs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In our school, parents are viewed as critical stakeholders in our students' academic achievement and as a result considerable efforts are made in order to engage them with knowledge about school events, activities and important information as well as strategies to assist their child with homework. Every effort is made to communicate in the parent's native language. All communication materials that are sent to their homes, is translated into Spanish (the dominant language of our student body). Our goal is to encourage families to be actively involved in the learning community of our school. The principal, staff and outside agencies will provide multiple workshops throughout the year to engage parents in the education of their children. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent workshop series are offered to all parents who wish to hear information about upcoming events and activities that are planned and set up for the school year. All parents are also encouraged to attend PTA meetings and other parent-related programs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. There is no additional information at this time. 2018-19 CEP 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Katwona Warren, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brownsville Academy High Schoo School DBN: 17K568 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carol Ying Title Principal Nicole Simpkins Assistant Principal Kim Ritter Karen Wynn Gail Durrant Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Hilda Ficentise Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Christina Green School Counselor Paul Rotondo Christine Etienne Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 1/10/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/1/17 10/1/17 10/1/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17K568 School Name: Brownsville Academy High School Superintendent: Paul Rotundo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Danielle Moorer Community Associate no no * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language that they can understand, we used background information on our ELL population, observation of actual beginning of the year registration and review of the HLIS for the ELLs in our program. We then tabulated the number of parents that spoke languages other than English and determined that there was a need for translation of notices and information about a child's academic performance, ways to increase student achievement and enhance the parents' understanding of academic standards, assessments and tests. We also provide information on parent communication needs in the Language Allocation Plan for the school. The ESL teacher or administration conduct one to one conferences and confer with the parents by telephone, on their individual communication needs. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English English 100% English 100% Spanish Spanish 100% Spanish 100% Haitian Creole Haitian Creole French French 100% Haitian Creole 100% 100% French 100% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Newsletters/PTA Meeting monthly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have 2018-19 CEP 64  Calendars Monthly Announcements Daily signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 2018-19 CEP 65  State Tests Twice a Year E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation 4 times a year Parent Teacher Conferences service(s)? As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 2018-19 CEP 66  PTA/ SLT Meetings Community School Meetings Monthly IEP Meetings Periodically E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 2018-19 CEP 67  Disciplinary Meetings Periodically As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. In the event we require extra support we reach out to Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy Translation and Interpretation Unit NYCDOE 45-18 Court Square - 2nd Floor Long Island City, NY 11101 E-mail: translations@schools.nyc.gov http://www.nyc.gov/schools/offices/translation Phone: 718-752-7373 Fax: 718-752-7390 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. As per A-663 we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We provide PD on vital chancellor's regulations at the beginning of every school year in September. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 CEP 68  As per A-663 we will provide each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require assistance service with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in the main office, and the parent coordinator's office. We will make sure that school calendars and notices are translated in a timely manner to ensure that parents who need them actually receive them. We will make sure that teachers notify the office prior to a parent meeting where a translator is needed. In this manner, we may provide a school employee so that translation services will be provided. At the present time we have enough staff members to accommodate our translation needs. We do have signs in the lobby of our school advertising such services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather feedback from parents via their parent surveys. We will also collect data via weekly parent outreach calls in through conversations with parents when they visit the scholar for other matters. 2018-19 CEP 69 
