2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K581 School Name: EAST FLATBUSH COMMUNITY RESEARCH SCHOOL Principal: JAMEELA HORTON-BALL 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Middle School Of Media Law and Fine Arts 331800010581 6-8 School Number (DBN): 18K581 905 Winthrop Street, 2nd floor Brooklyn,NY 11203 718-773-7343 718-773-7946 Phone Number: JameelaHorton jhorton2@schools.nyc.gov Fax: Email Address: Kenya George: University Settlement and Sports and Arts Schools Foundation School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: JameelaHorton Nichelle Haynes Lynette Bourne Nichelle Haynes N/A District Information Beverly Wilkins Superintendent: East 95th Street bwilkins@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 566-6008 Phone Number: 718 649-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  South Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 759-4862 Phone Number: N/A Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY 11209 N/A 718 630-1633 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X x Name Position and Constituent Group JameelaHorton Nichelle Haynes-Trant Ricquel Sheridan Margaret Johnson Leta Adonus Hall Kenya George N/A N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Valerie John Linda Underdue Wycliffe McAllister Alex Rodriguez Sabrina Davis Maria Simmons Gillian Thomas Alime Phyll Jordan Dante Rodriguez x x x x x x Teacher/UFT Teacher/UFT Teacher/UFT Teacher/UFT Parent Parent Parent Parent Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Our school’s vision statement is to create a safe environment in which authentic learning experiences builds character and empowers students to become independent thinkers. The schools acronym EFCRS is representation of the school's motto which stands for Molding Leaders into Fearless Advocates, is the catalyst used to establish character development, advocacy, creativity and self identity among the student body, through exposure to a media, law and fine arts curriculum. Our mission is to:  Provide CCLS aligned curriculum for all content areas and establish rich-partnerships that enhance instructional practices and engage students in rigorous experiences.  Embed expanded learning time in student schedules to provide academic interventions and expose them to a variety of enrichment activities  Utilize a station teaching model approach to enhance student centered learning, engagement, questioning and discussion, that will create a platform for students and teachers to regularly assess individual, small group, whole class teaching and learning practice.. Based on the Great Framework, we made great gains in Effective Leadership, Trust, and Collaborative Teachers; Our focus this year will be Rigorous Instruction, specifically math proficiency, ELL progress, and the school's lowest third progress. Our CBO partnerships include University Settlement, The Leadership Program, and SASF. Our national partner is Turnaround: Arts through the President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities. Our academic partners include Urban Advantage (Science), Math Matters, and MSQI literacy program. These partnerships support our continued growth with Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers Our Extended Learning Time program begins in October until and ends in June. It is open to all of our students. The program includes: ● 2.5 hours of extended learning time ● Differentiated instruction based on tiered programming and sub-groups. ● Technology based programming in every classroom to tier the instruction. ● Enrichment activities based on student choice through surveys 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  ● Offer Saturday Academy to provide additional academic support to our students. In addition, sub groups may include the lowest third, students who are on the cusp of meeting the CCLS. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K581 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 131 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 13 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 87.8% % Reduced Lunch 11.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.8% 7.6% 3.8% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 23 24 94.7% 3.1% 26.0% 87.8% 0.0% 0.8% 4 7% 7.4 13.4% 27% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths Our teachers utilize a station teaching approach that is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and our school-wide curriculum maps. During their weekly department team and Professional Learning Community meetings, teachers meet to review student work to identify gaps in instruction and learn about research based instructional practices proven to impact student achievement. Our staff analyzes data on a 8 week cycle. They create action plans for the standards that were not mastered and incorporate those skills in our end of unit performance tasks. ● Implement research based instructional practices proven to impact student achievement. ● Identify gaps in their instructional practices based on student data. ● Create lessons and standards based action plans to target standards not being met by students. ● We implement an array of school-wide assessments to ensure that students are administered interim assessments on a quarterly basis (once every 2 months) which include the Degrees of Reading Power, Math, reading and phonics inventory through Houghton Miflin as well as the I-Ready and Ready assessments. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  All students receive 4 periods of school-wide strategic reading intervention periods each week which provides targeted reading instruction that: Incorporates online and print literary and informational texts inclusive of content specific real-world genre based readings. ● Scaffolds texts by exposing them to grade level readings and accessible text ● Requires text based writing responses which allowed students to comprehend, analyze, and synthesize the information present ● Tracks students growth in reading levels Throughout the year, the data will be used to inform student groupings during the strategic intervention period and classroom instructional periods. Needs Based on the data collected from our formalized assessment cycle; we’ve identified the following needs for our school community:  Providing daily instructional interventions that meet the learning styles and address the needs of our Tier 1 students.  Development of departmental reading and writing strategies that are consistent across content area classrooms.  Create targeted lessons that address the craft and structure Common Core Literacy Standards across all grade levels. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our school’s instructional focus is to utilize station teaching structures as a platform for strengthening student centered engagement, questioning and discussion practices, in an effort of supporting teachers and students in utilizing "real time data" to assess gaps in learning and improve individual and collective student achievement. Our teachers will implement units of study inclusive of specific skills aligned to the Common Core State Standards and our school-wide curriculum maps. Each unit of study will have daily differentiated station tasks that are aligned with CCLS standards, a cumulative performance task that will serve as formative and summative assessments at the end of the unit. Teachers will evaluate the success of each performance task by aligning it to key learning standards and the instructional shifts. Teachers will review student work against the CCLS to identify gaps in instruction, modify instruction and administer rigorous and meaningful performance based tasks. Department teams will review the vertical alignment of the CCLS during their weekly meetings to ensure that tasks are at the appropriate level of rigor for each grade and group of students. Staff will analyze student performance data that consists of benchmark and interim assessments, end of unit performance tasks, Degrees of Reading Power assessment, and other related benchmarks on a quarterly cycle and create action plans for the standards that were not mastered by incorporating those skills in our end of unit performance tasks. Teachers will also implement a re-teach stations and tasks throughout the unit to support students 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  in maintaining, expanding understanding of taught content and/or addressing areas of deficiency throughout the progression of the unit of study. Every student across grades 6-8 will receive targeted intervention in both ELA and Math. 4 periods of intervention will be provided for students in each of the two respective content areas. The intervention periods are designed to target individual student needs. Students are grouped by reading levels and math levels. The reading levels are aligned to the results of our reading screener assessment (DRP). In addition to the DRP screener, a Reading, Phonics and Math Inventory will also be be administered to assess and identify related content deficiencies. Students will participate in the following intervention programs during Reading and Math Interventions: Reading Interventions: Imagine learning (ELL's and emergent readers reading below grade 6), Close Reading and Analysis (students on grade level with comprehension needs), Guided Reading, Book clubs using classical literature as a basis for advancing students who are reading above grade level in grade 6 and 7 and Regents US History and Government for those students reading 9th grade level and above in the 8th grade) Math Interventions will include use of Imagine Math differentiated computer platform in addition to teachers using the data from the software to create strategic math strategy groups to address foundational skills that students are deficient in. In addition, select 8th grade students will be able to immersed in Math Algebra regents prep during the related intervention periods. Re-teach materials provide through our partnership with Math Matters will be used to create tiered math intervention groups. The 8th grade Regents class will receive Math Regents instruction during intervention. Increased amounts of planning time will support teacher collaboration. Teacher teams will engage in common planning periods during a weekly double block session to focus on standards aligned units of study and daily lesson planning, analysis of student work products, and peer feedback. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? The school wide station teaching structures incorporate scaffolds, including graphic organizers and thinking maps tp support the need of diverse learners such as ELL's and SWD's. Curricula includes  Arts integrated lessons/project based learning activities  College and career readiness curriculum  Station teaching approach to support students thinking critically, annotating text, developing cooperative sharing, learning and speaking skills We will also utilize the District wide Restorative Justice Partnership to ensure an inclusive climate. The integration of the newly formed Fine Arts curriculum that is embedded in the instructional day and our partnership with Turnaround Arts will provide arts integrated instruction to further develop choice, diverse learning styles and project based learning. This will increase the rigor in the learning activities and allow students to learn through inquiry. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? .The school will also utilize Google Classroom as a platform for integrating technology and instruction. Students will have electronic access to assignments in order to complete and submit work. This curriculum will address instructional shifts such as enhancement of academic discourse, increasing their level of questioning, and provide them with organizational skills. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? The school will utilize its art and media instructional sections, students will be exposed to culturally diverse learning through visual arts, music, media, and dance. Students will be able to perform skits, engage in poetry/ spoken word, create art work, graphic designs, engage in performances that will allow them to share their learning with the community as it relates to their culture and that of their peers. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Teachers are expected to analyze data on a cyclical basis to identify needs of students in sub groups, individual, grade and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  whole school trends. This data will inform their instructional practices, and support planning for tiered activities. Implementation of the station teaching model, small group conferring, and tiered activities emb2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  edded into lesson plans will allow for access to the lessons, and target specific needs. Blended Learning-integration of technology is also a strategy for access. The use of Google translate serves as a usef2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  ul tool for students who are able to read a second language. Use of and analysis of data from Skedula DDC, I-Ready and DRP Data will serve as a catalyst for monitoring and tracking student perform2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  ance. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Teacher professional development will be differentiated by content area need through weekly common planning sessions and Monday PD. In addition, data used from individual teacher Advance observations will be used to provide specific teachers with individual feedback, coaching and pedagogical support. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase the average ELA proficiency rate by 3% in order to meet AYP in ELA. This will be accomplished by engaging teachers in targeted professional development cycles, providing 1:1 coaching with content area lead teachers, administrators, and providing them with timely actionable feedback every 6 weeks. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Growth percentile Student performance levels MOTP ratings 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Implementation of the Station teaching structures, I-Ready and Middle School Quality Initiative Vocabulary Instruction Strategies (Word Generation) . ELA MOTP Teachers All Students August 2018 – June 2019 Administration Content Area Leads Curriculum Team Administration, ELA instructional lead How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Observation reports, MOTP, Student Proficiency Levels Use Imagine Readingto support ELL and struggling readers build literacy deficiencies and as well as use I-Ready, Word Generation, and Engage NY standards based instruction to differentiated instruction specific to student needs. Each program has leveled instruction that can be tailored to the individual need or can be translated in their home language. ELA, SS and Science DRP, Fall/Spr. Benchmarks August Administration, 2018 – June Urban Advantage DRP Scores, DDC MOSL SCores 2019 Staff Developer, Other Staff Developers, Teachers Teachers, Elective Teachers Students with disabilities and English Language Learners 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26 All Students MOSL September Administration, DRP 2018 – June Staff Developers and/or Teacher 2019 Teams Utilizing the New York State content specific rubrics for each department alongside instructional and performance tasks Implement a school-wide vocabulary focus utilizing Word Generation. Use of vocabulary words will be tracked during student to student discussions, inclusion in daily writing activities, weekly instructional tasks, and unit performance tasks. Use of technology to track student understanding of content daily. Teachers will utilize the data reports generated from the daily use of the iReady program, Smartboard clickers, and TEQ Smartboards to create lesson plans and activities based on the level of student mastery. We will adopt discussion protocols to engage students in academic discourse. This strategy will engage students in increased comprehension, increase rigor, and allow students to be self-directed. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27 ELL NYSESLAT September Administration Students 2018 – June Teacher Teams DRP, ELL Benchmarks, NYSESLAT 2019 Co-Teachers Use of Imagine Reading for ESL student Reading and vocabulary support. Develop a speaking/listening learning objective for each of the core content areas 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will support families by providing each student with quarterly progress reports detailing strengths and weaknesses. The school community will also provide ongoing instructional workshops to support families in understanding the expectations for students as it relates to New York State standards expectations. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Math Solutions Staff Developers Math Matters Staff Developers The Leadership Program Skedula online grading system and Data Driven Classroom Turnaround Arts Partnership iReady online resources Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The impact of each activity will be measured using the following systems: ● Cyclical curriculum audits inclusive of unit and daily lesson plans. ● Student performance results from baseline and interim assessments, DRP assessment, end of unit performance tasks, and teacher assessments. ● Daily teacher assessment reports as per the online resources ● Advance observation report ratings by Domain and indicator The DRP reading assessment and reading and math inventory exams are taken 3 times per year. As a result, the assessments will be used to monitor and assess student progression toward meeting specified goal. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Spring Ready Assessments student performance report Winter DRP assessment Dashboard report Staff surveys, Teacher Observations, Classroom Inter-visitations Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school community will implement the following systems to address the social and emotional needs of students throughout the 2018-2019 school year: ● Small group restorative circles that met weekly (no more than 15 students in a group) ● Monthly grade level town-hall meetings to celebrate student accomplishments ● Weekly counseling (individual, group, and gender based) ● Student Government Association to provide students with a voice in the social and celebratory activities that occurred throughout the school year. ● 4-6 periods of arts activities embedded in the school week (dance, music, drama, etc) ● Student-Led Conferences 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  We will also partner with the following organizations to support the developmental and social health of our student body: ● University Settlement – After school Program which contains a social worker who provides counseling and mediation for students based on collected data and/or as needed ● Interborough Mental Health Services- A counselor is positioned in the school community to provide additional counseling with parental consent to those students in need ● The Leadership Program – CBO partnership will assist the school in creating gender based sessions to support the social and emotional help of both boys and girls as well as provide professional development for teachers and families as to how they can support student social and emotional stability in the classroom and at home. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? In order to improve our supportive environment practices will take the following actions to expand on the social and emotional supports provided to our student body: Work with our Community Based Organization, University Settlement to expand on the mental health programs currently in place in implementing a physical health program to provide health care interventions for our student body and their families. Teachers and related staff within the school community will continue to receive Restorative Justice Training and coaching through our District Wide Office of Safety and Youth Development partnership to further enhance the facilitation of community circles and Restorative practices within our school community. We will expand on the roles and responsibilities of our student government to include students during one grade team meeting per month to address the concerns of the students in the grade. Our teachers will be provided with professional development from our Counseling in Schools site-social worker on address the needs of our student population and taking culturally responsive actions. Members of our Student Support Team will meet weekly with grade teams and facilitate a monthly professional development meetings using research-based best practices and student data and trends to coach teachers through recommended interventions and strategies for addressing the needs of their students. Student Support Team members will also develop case studies for subgroups of students and review monthly and share findings with teachers. This team will also provide restorative training for parents. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. Culture and trust between students and teachers will be established through Restorative Justice practices and school wide Advisory structures. Each teacher, including support staff, will serve as an Advisor to a group of students. Students and staff will meet weekly to discuss grades, individual needs including areas of strength and need. Parents will be 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  notified of progress weekly via communication via progress reports, direct phone calls, email and use of Skedula which is an online grading system that the teacher, student and parent as 24/7 access to. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus University Settlement Youth development, mental health, expanded day Leadership social and emotional professional development for teachers social and emotional student programs for students How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? They provide youth development services such as enrichment activities, cultural exposure, and community service which allows for experiential learning, character growth, and healthy living. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? De-escalation, tolerance, cultural diversity, peer mediation and conflict resolution and gender based sessions related to the needs of adolescents What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? OORS reports, Skedula anecdotes, student surveys, etc. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will decrease the number of incidents captured in our OORS data by 5% in order to develop positive school climate, trust and sustain our practices for building culture. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance OORS reports 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32 Report Card 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Implement school based incentive structures using live school system. Students Live School Sept 2018 CBO OORS Report – June 2019 Administration Teachers Staff Anecdotals on Skedula Sept 2018 Administration, Provide incentive trips for successful students using our digital portfolio data in Skedula All Students – June PBIS Team At Risk, SWD, 2019 CBOs-- Provide cultural responsiveness and mental health trainings for all staff members ELLs, Boy/Girl groups Use the Skedula online grading workbook to track academic and behavioral anecdotals to provide targeted interventions to individual students, advisory groups, and parents The Leadership Program University Settlement Interboro mental health clinic How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Live School Reports OORS Reports Student Lounge Incentive Tracker through Live School N/A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  Parents will have access to Skedula which will provide them with real time data to know how their child is doing in school. Advisors' will also receive weekly phone calls from their child's Advisor to inform them of academic, social and emotional updates. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Tax Levy/Title 1 Funds Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The impact of each activity will be measured using the following systems: ● Students monitoring revision of academic and personal goals three times throughout the year in accordance with Skedula Grading system ● Datacation: Pupilpath digital portfolio and Skedula-Student course pass rate ● Principal and Superintendent suspension rates ● Learning Environment Survey responses ● School climate/culture surveys administered three times a year Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Principal and Superintendent suspension rates report in OORS  DESH student survey ( administered 3 times a year through DYCD)   IO (formerly known as Datacation anecdotal logs report Surveys Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) x 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths - Using station teaching structures to strengthen student centered engagement and learning Needs  Using real time data to help the teacher assess gaps in teaching as well as help students assess gaps in learning from an individual and peer collaborative perspective  Ensuring that activities and tasks differentiate in rigor and/or are aligned to the learning target/instructional focus Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Teachers will meet during weekly 80 minute content area common planning sessions and collaboratively across content area during weekly Monday PD sessions. During the sessions, teachers will be immersed in professional learning that focuses in on improving student engagement, questioning/discussion and use of real time data to assess gaps in learning. ELA and Math teachers will utilize a weekly data meeting protocol which allow them analyze student work to determine, plan and outline specific instructional moves that will be implemented to address instructional gaps. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? During our weekly cabinet meetings the administrative team will identify trends in teacher observations to establish professional development opportunities for teachers. Administration will observe at least two teachers per week provide each teacher with actionable next steps inclusive of a time-line for completion. Each week, the cabinet facilitates instructional rounds to look for consistent practices aligned to the instructional focus. Provides individual and department teams with feedback. The observation feedback informs our professional development plan as well as the coaching cycle with the model teachers. The teacher leaders support their peers in implementing feedback and or implementation of new strategies directly following the PD sessions. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Weekly common planning structure to provide content area professional development, share best practices, analyze data, engage in curriculum mapping, revise instructional practices, etc. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed DDC Data Benchmarks Report Cards Intent six week progress checks comparison to peers and beginning to year alignment between teacher practice and standards Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? The school will utilize the DRP assessment 3 times per year to determine students reading levels. In addition to the DRP, the school will also utilize a Reading Inventory to attain individual reading comprehension and phonemic awareness understanding. A math inventory will also be provided to all students in order to determine math proficiency levels as it relates to made foundational skill sets or mathematical gaps that students may be lacking in order to be successful at meeting grade level math standards. The data from the aforementioned assessments will be triangulated in order to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  determine the individual academic interventions needs of each student. The data will also be used to provide differentiated math and ELA intervention supports for students. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 100% of teachers within the school community will engage in weekly purposeful, collaborative planning sessions by June of 2019. By the end of the 2019 school year, all content area teachers will have cohesive curriculum maps aligned with CCLS expectations. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Growth percentile Student Performance levels Attendance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher DDC reports Sept 2018 Administration, Teams All Students – June Staff Developers 2019 ELA/Math Teacher Teams RTI Team Teacher lesson plans Sept. Administration Teams Advance data 2018- June Peer Collaborative All Students 2019 Teacher Model Teachers Common Planning time will be embedded in the teachers schedule via a 80 minute double block once per week to increase the amount of collaborative planning for daily lesson plan revisions, analysis of student work, and modifications to provide access for all students. During this time, teachers will also plan re-teach lessons for the unit following data day when they identify standards not mastered. Utilize Peer and Model teachers to coach content teachers, demonstrate lab sites, and conduct peer inter-visitations. I Development of teacher teams that will address the Teacher Teams LES June 2018- June 2019 Grade Department Teams How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Unit Plans and DDC reports 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  benchmarks of effectiveness attached to The Great Framework for School. The All Students curriculum team will assess the effectiveness of the action plan outline for rigorous instruction. The RTI team will assess the effectiveness of the action plan outline for all sub-populations. Both grade and department teams will engage in horizontal and vertical planning and alignment of CCLS. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PTA meetings, SLT and Advisory Structures Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Math Matters I-Ready Middle School Quality Initiative Algebra for All A-Net Datacation Skedula Math Solutions Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teacher teams will engage in a data cycle of progress monitoring which includes the revision units of study and daily lesson plans in order to address student learning gaps. The impact of each activity will be measured using the following systems:  Student reading performance levels on the Degrees of Reading Power assessment in which will be administered in September, January, and May  Cyclical curriculum audits inclusive of unit and daily lesson plans.  Student performance results from baseline and interim assessments, DRP assessment, performance tasks, and teacher assessments.  Daily teacher assessments consisting of three checks for understanding embedded into lesson plans.  Review of unit plans by instructional coaches, lead teachers, and school administration.  Review of instructional plans by members of the administration and its alignment to the school-wide  instructional focus. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready Benchmarks DRP assessment tool Math, Phonics and Reading Inventory through Houghton Miflin Google Drive Data Driven Classroom platform and Schoolnet Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) x 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The school leader’s strengths include: ● Developing structures and systems for community needs ● Hiring key personnel and setting high expectations ● Making strategic organizational decisions using multiple funding sources ● Conducting observations using an observation cycle defined in three cycles. The cycles include walk-through summations and mid-year conversations. ● Utilizing various forms of data to inform community needs ● Building teacher leadership 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Evidence based systems include qualitative and quantitative measures such as school-wide interim assessments, state assessments, end of unit assessments, student pass rates, observation reports, and various surveys. The observation process includes a cyclical process with other administrators that include walk-throughs, data dives, mid-year conversations, and summation reports. The process is cyclical every 6-8 weeks. The integration of teams to assess effectiveness by pillars assists the school community in accountability. Developing relationships with multiple CBOs (University Settlement, Interboro) creates a network of thought partners to support the community needs. The assistant principal will monitor the systems to ensure success alongside the leader. The CBO will serve as an additional administrator for the supplemental services needed in the community; create a sustainability plan, and leverage partnerships and resources to improve the school community. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school?  Providing written feedback no more than two weeks after the observation to ensure accountability of teacher implementation and coaching.  Attend principal conferences, utilize peers as thought partners, and revise structures based on progress  Facilitate coaching cycles with teacher leaders What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Incorporate a model teacher in ELA and in Matt to serve as department team leaders for content areas alongside the grade team leader. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Partner with two CBOs (University Settlement and Leadership) to ensure that we engage the parent community and increase involvement based on individual family needs. Our primary CBO attend SLT meetings. Parents will take-on executive board roles on the School Leadership Team. Utilize PD, common planning time, grade team meetings, SLT, and PTA to align and norm our practices as it relates to the instructional focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Skedula: DDC Part 3 – Annual Goal instructional support: Modified activities, RTI Dept. teams, grade teams, lead teachers, admin. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019 increase the amount of effective teachers by 20% as per Advance and the observation process. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Advance- MOTP scores Attendance N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Create data charts to show progress and student work that the community can see so that all progress is transparent. Community State Exam Sept. 2018-June 2109 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Assistant Principal DDC Peer/Model Teachers Grade team leaders Dept. Leaders CBO Director Foster a welcoming environment so that shared spaces clearly illustrate collaboration. Engage in multiple branding strategies to recruit incoming students and increase student enrollment. Implement strategies as per the Renewal Community Schools initiative. Develop health/wellness PD School Enrollment Roster September Principal Sign-up sheets Community 2018-June Assistant Principal 2019 Peer/Model Teachers Grade team leaders Dept. Leaders CBO Director School OORS reports September Principal Community Attendance 2018-June Assistant Principal 2019 Peer/Model Teachers Student Support Meetiings, agendas and minutes 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45 Grade team leaders Dept. Leaders CBO Director School PD tracker September Principal Community Teacher Leaders Hiring 2018-June Assistant Principals MOTP observation reports 2019 Peer/Model Teachers Grade team leaders Dept. Leaders CBO Director series to support the social emotional needs of adults within the community Attend professional development series for school leaders Increase the amount of teacher leaders pursuing administrative certificates by 5% Conduct 1:1 monthly coaching sessions based on Advance MOTP report three times a year to provide targeted and actionable feedback to cohorts of teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Leadership and engagement will be promoted through monthly parent updates, via the School Leadership team, use of teachers serving as Advisors, parent workshop offerings and use of weekly open access/scheduled Tuesday, Parent meetings to discuss individual student academic, social and emotional progress. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. DOE Master Teacher Funding Professional Development partnerships: Teachers College, Math Solutions, Urban Advantage, Commonweal, etc... The Leadership Program 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  CBO Director Director of School Renewal Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Learning Environment Surveys administered three times a year MOTP reports as per Advance Principal Performance Observation Office of renewal walkthroughs Building Council Minutes Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MMPR PPO rubric Data Driven Classroom, PM dashboard Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The principal has also used these forums to make parents aware of the school’s academic expectations and need of an increase 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  in parental involvement. Teachers and Guidance Counselors reach out to families on weekly basis to provide updates on student progress towards goals and concerns. All stakeholders work together set goals, identify, and implement strategies that support the success of our students. Progress reports issued between report card distributions to keep families updated on their child’s academic progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? The school community has put many systems in place to ensure the development and maintenance of a collaborative relationship with our student’s families and the community at large. Families are provided with multiple forums inclusive of the four mandated parent teacher conferences to address and the concerns or collaborate in the development of their child’s academic and socio-emotional development. These forums include: ● Monthly parent workshops hosted by our parent coordinator and the Leadership Program ● Incoming 6th grade orientation ● Three talent showcases throughout the school yea ● School-wide dances ● Annual Family Science Day at the Botanical Gardens ● Monthly PTA and SLT meetings ● School-wide trips ● Weekly grade team meetings ● Blackboard connect phone system ● Monthly parent newsletter and school calendar ● Use of Skedula platform to communicate student progress in academics and socio-emotional growth ● On-site Mental health services for students through Interborough partnership ● On-site School Social Worker through Counseling in Schools partnership Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? As part of the community school model, our families are welcomed through:  Community School Director facilitates a Community Breakfast twice a year with varying constituents  Provides workshops and trainings based on parent needs as per the survey data. Administrators, school safety, and staff meet regularly to discuss parent concerns and strategize based on needs. Those forums include: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  SLT meetings, building safety meetings, Tuesday parent meetings, and 1:1 mediation meetings with Student support teams. The Parent Coordinator includes a space in her office for families to work within the school when invited or when volunteering their time. Our CBO partner, University Settlement will provide family services to the families in addition to the supports the school provides. The parents have an open space in the Parent Coordinators office but are also invited in the CBO community room. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? During PTA, community cares meetings, and community forums, we invite parent volunteers as well as elect official committees and positions in investing and taking on leadership roles. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? We will engage families through celebratory activities such as awards nights, parents nights, arts nights, community forums, community carnivals. During the second half of PTA meetings, parents are invited to workshops specific to patterns and trends within the community i.e. cyberbullying During PTA, community cares meetings, and community forums, we invite parent volunteers as well as elect official committees and positions in investing and taking on leadership roles. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: The Leadership Program Family partnerships with CBO: University Settlement Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? yes What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Curriculum nights, Student-led conferences, and PTA Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will increase the positive response rate on the parent survey by 2% per the Learning Environment Survey. We will accomplish this goal by:  Continuing to host monthly parent workshops  Improve reciprocal communication with families and community by increasing family members on the Community School Team/School Leadership Team. Increase access to social services for community members and their families through a social service monthly newsletter which will be offered campus-wide.   Our Community School' Director will survey parents and families three times during the school year to identify workshops they would be interested in participating in. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Learning Environment Survey and Quality Snapshot reports Performance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Implement Push Notifications through Skedula system Families Skedula September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Administration PTA President The Leadership Program How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance Sheets Restorative Practices family workshop series Families Attendance Tracker September Parent Attendance Sheets and LES 2017-June Coordinator, PTA Students 2018 Executive Board, Community School Director, Community Associate, Social Worker, Guidance Counselors, Administration Engage parents through Job Readiness Series with partnership with Kingsbrook Medical Center/Downstate Medical Center Families Attendance Tracker September Community School Attendance sheets 2017-June Director, 2018 Administration, Community 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Associate, Parent Coordinator n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Community School Director PTA executive Board Members SLT board members Youth Developers Social Workers The Leadership Program, CBO University Settlement, CB Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to monitor progress and ensure we meet our goals, our midpoint benchmarks would include: Datacation: PupilPath usage Attendance as per the PCar for parent events Reciprocal communication through PupilPath(Email) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  PTC attendance Tuesday Meetings Log Targeted parent Meetings based on Skedula anecdotals (behavioral/academic) Progress monitoring will occur every 6 weeks. The mid- point benchmark is February 2019.. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent Participation (Meeting Sign In Sheets )  Parent Coordinator (PCar) system Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The summative goal of Extended Learning Time is to provide educational programming which will respond to the unique needs of students and maximize their potential. In addition, ELT programming increases school-wide learning opportunities in high-quality extended school day and/or extended school year programs with a focus on improving academic achievement, and social-emotional development through engaging community building activities. The Extended Learning Program goals include: ● By June, 2019, we will increase student achievement by 3% in literacy via the implementation of Imagine Learning program, small group and other extracurricular activities. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. ELT is a non-negotiable. All students are required to take part in the extended learning time. There is only one dismissal time for all students which embeds the ELT. At the beginning of the year, all parents are made aware of the mandatory extended learning time and are required to ensure that there child attends. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56   Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The Expanded Learning Time program will be divided into academic and enrichment programming offered to our entire student body that will be presented as part of the school day for all students. For the enrichment portion of Expanded Learning Time, students will be administered an interest survey three times during the school year. Each survey will have students identify the types of activities they would like to be offered and which activities they would like to participate in. Based on the selection, students will be assigned to an activity that reflects their first or second choice. To date, the art based school day and after school activities offered include track and field, Cooking, Dancing, Drama, Student Government, African Drumming, Majorettes, Marching Band,Visual Arts, Technology “Coding”, and Media. For the academic portion of our ELT programming, students will take part in the following: STEM Education through IO Education,Imagine Learning computer based instruction , MSExTRA small group tutoring program, and I-Ready on-line academic instruction in English language arts and mathematics. Our classroom teachers will serve as instructors for the academic programs offered. We will tier the academic component of our ELT to ensure that all students receive the proper instructional supports based on their academic performance. Groupings will be determined by each student’s individual performance on baseline and interim assessments in math and English language arts, and the Degrees of Reading Power assessment. Our ELLs will utilize the i-Ready on-line instruction program. Students performing below grade level standards and SWD’s will also use the iReady online instruction program, Ready direct instruction workbook, and small group strategic reading tutoring (4 to 1). All students performing at or above grade level will have an opportunity to engage in our STEM programming options. Our CBO will hire qualified teaching artists and community associates for enrichment offerings. Professional development for all CBO employees and ELT teachers will be provided by University Settlement site director and after school program administrator however, opportunities for joint professional development sessions with the school staff will be offered such as attending the staff retreat. The school will communicate with families through the use of the Blackboard connect phone blast system, individual phone calls made by the after school program director, and mail correspondence. This program will be outlined as follows: ● Two and a half hours of extended learning time ● Differentiated instruction based on tiered programming and student interest ● Technology based programming in every academic activity 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  ● Enrichment activities based on student choice through surveys ● three culminating showcases at the conclusion of each cycle(3 cycles for the school year) ● A male and female empowerment group to address socio-emotional needs of the student body ● Saturday Academy to provide additional academic support to our students ● Bi-monthly professional development sessions with the CBO and school teachers addressing students’ need, and purposeful planning around the social-emotional component ● Monthly correspondence via parent newsletter and calendar Utilizing Blackboard connect telephone system which serves as a communication system to inform parents of student’s attendance, school announcements, and upcoming school events. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The key personnel that is responsible for the implementation of the program are as follows: ● The Community School Director, Kenya George ● Expanded Day Coordinator – Westley Johnson ● Extended Learning Time administrator - Ms. Granados The evaluation of the effectiveness of the program will be monitored by: Student interest and feedback survey administered three times throughout the year. ● Student academic performance on interim assessments, the Degrees of Reading Power assessment, and unit based performance tasks ● Monthly meetings with all participants of the ELT program ● Bi-weekly observations by school administration to provide feedback on academic instructional practices ● Facilitate bi-monthly professional development sessions for all Extended learning participants Bi-weekly review of data to assess student completion of assignments and mastery of standards 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018-June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Resources needed to implement the ELT program are: ● Allocated funds for the teachers and supervisor of the ELT program(Per session) ● Arts supplies for the enrichment activity ●  Cooking Supplies for the Cooking enrichment activity Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III X Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X C4E X SIG Grant School X Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The effectiveness of our Expanded Learning Time program will be monitored using the following benchmarks: ● 100 % participation in the Expanded Learning Time program (all students attend) ● Academic Progression reports generated through i-Ready ● Reduction of incidents occurring in Extended learning Time program via OORS report ● Student participation and engagement in the talent showcase held after at the commencement of each 6 week cycle ● Interest survey administered three times during the school year to gauge student level of satisfaction 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The evaluation of the effectiveness of the program will be monitored by:  Qualitative Data: o Reduction of incidents occurring in Extended learning Time program via OORS report o Student participation and engagement in the talent showcase held after at the commencement of each cycle o Assessment survey administered two times during the school year to gauge student level of satisfaction with program and the level of engagement with activities. o Expanded Day curriculum development for key expanded day offerings.  Quantitative Data: o Learning Environment Survey o 99% participation in the Expanded Learning Time program (all students attend) o Progress Report Data o Facilitate bi-monthly professional development sessions for all Extended learning participants o Bi-weekly review of data to assess student completion of assignments and mastery of standards o DRP Scores - 5:1 tutoring literacy-based intervention with program and the level of engagement with activities. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? 1) To effectively secure and integrate additional resources into the school to help address both student/community needs – those needs will be determined by the needs assessments that are/will be conducted. 2) To expand the mental health services offered to students throughout the Winthrop Campus. 3) To work closely with the Parent Coordinator and other stakeholders to strengthen and increase parent engagement and to provide targeted resources that will empower them. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in Collaboration with University Settlement, EFCRS will 1. Develop and implement a partnership plan where selective expanded day services are Sesame Flyers Beacon Program & Sports and Arts (New York Edge). This partnership will allow for us to share resources, provide more academic tracks for our all performance levels, and create a shared culture of collaboration. 2. Increase report card grades for targeted youth who are performing at the school’s lowest third in ELA & Math Student Support: Attendance, Academic, Behavioral 1. Decrease the attendance rate of chronically absent youth by 2% decrease to maintain our attendance benchmark 2. We will decrease the school’s OORS incident reports by 5%. Each month we will, plan monthly incentives trips, input panther pay data (PBIS model) and host monthly PBIS behavioral incentive auctions Strong Family & Community Ties 1. Increase the annual participation rate of parents who participate in at least one event by 3% as per the parent tracker 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61 2. Increase the average participation rate of parents who participate in at least two events by 2% as per the parent tracker 3. Increase the number of intervention/social services workshops offered to parents and community members at large by 2, based on community needs. 4. Develop a strategic partnership the newly appointed council member of District 41 Mental Health & Wellness 1. Create individualized plans for at-risk youth by analyzing attendance, academic and behavioral data 2. Provide individualized counseling to identified at-risk youth 3. We will develop a mental health building council, where mental health stakeholders will meet monthly with the purpose of making referrals and sharing best practices Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Research states that student success and ability to thrive in school is directly connected to community relations and support increase family engagement and assistance with social, emotional and health supports. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service University Settlement Leadership Program Interboro 6-8 6-8 6-8 Community, Mental Health Parent and student services Mental health Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1) In collaboration with the school’s principal and members of the SLT, University Settlement has promoted the current Expanded Day Director at to fulfill the Community School’s Coordinator position. 2) University Settlement will continue to provide Expanded Day programming at EFCRS. Currently, the program offers 2 ½ hours of additional services for the entire school, in collaboration with several CBOs. University Settlement has already began the work of strengthening programming – specifically within our academic component of our ELT. Recently, we have partnered with Girls Who Code which is a non-for-profit whose mission to expose and teach young girls from urban communities coding. We have sought out two additional grants that will provide coaching to staff that will build capacity in core subjects. All mental health programming will be planned and implemented by University Settlement’s full-time Social Worker, who will work closely with the Guidance office and on-site Social Worker who is partnered with 3) In the early stages of planning, University Settlement will host a series of focus groups, where our parents will collaborate on developing the vision for their community school. In addition, we will partner with the school’s PTA in hosting forums throughout the year to ensure that parents are consistently in the conversation. In addition, there will be a resource hub for our families to have access to. Information will include but not limited to: emergency housing, food assistance, medical insurance, etc. 4) The current Expanded Day Director currently meets with the Principal and the School Renewal Director for District 18. Both the school and CBO partner has already developed structured time to discuss trends and will ensure that this topic is always an agenda item to discuss both quantitative and qualitative data. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1) Community School Director – University Settlement, Principal and school administration, teachers, parents, Parent Coordinator, Student Leadership Team, School Renewal Director, current CBO partners. 2) ELT programming will be supported by University Settlement, The Leadership Program, and CHAMPS. Over the past year, University Settlement has worked side-by-side with The Leadership Program and EFCRS administration to offer academic and other enrichment supports. Next year, we will keep this collaborative model to ensure that all ELT supports are available for all students. 3) We will continue to keep with all partnerships every other month to observe and debrief the effectiveness of program. We are currently looking to expanded our assessment tools to include quantitative data which will include attendance, increase parent involvement, etc. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. ● Instructional Supplies ● Kingsbrook/Downstate Partnership ● Director of School Renewal ● Partnerships with CBOs including counseling in schools, the leadership program, Computers for Youth Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Identify Community School Team & Establish Shared Vision ● Finalize Community School Team, including members of School Leadership Team, parents, students, CBO partners and community leaders in addition to principal and CS Coordinator – Early July Develop Community School Plan for Year One ● Begin recruitment of staff – early July ● Draft CS Plan – mid-July ● Finalize program/schedule of activities and staffing plan for extended day – late July ● Secure relevant curriculum resources and training for staff – late July 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  ● Share draft CS Plan with stakeholders via focus groups – early August Finalize School Year CBO Service Plan & Training ● Incorporate CS Plan feedback and finalize – mid-August ● Outreach to CBOs and elected officials with specific partnership opportunities – mid-June through mid-August ● Continued staff recruitment – mid-August ● Finalize CBO service coordination plan – mid-August ● Week-long staff orientation with joint training with in-school teachers – mid-August Community School Launch ● Host celebratory events for launch of Community School at EFCRS – late August ● Determine student and family communication plan – late August ● During the first community school team meeting, review community school vision and goals, organizational ● chart, communication plan, and program schedule – late August Health Supports ● Hire a full-time social worker to provide personalized support for students with special needs as well as to help integrate social-emotional supports into community school programming for all students. – Early August ● Facilitate access to University Settlement’s affiliation with youth development agency – The Door – A Center of Alternatives, who will provide youth services such as adolescent health education, facilitated referrals to adolescent health care and legal services for youth. – Early September ● Collaborate with the other community-based organizations within the Winthrop Campus and continue to foster EFCRS’ new relationship with Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center. – Ongoing ● Host a Fall & Spring Community Health Fair which will link community members to medical services, information, and Medicaid/Medicare access. – Early September ● Foster relationships with local elected representatives to advocate for community needs. Specifically, we will work with Community Boards 9 and 17, and Council members Darlene Mealy. – Early July ● Establish a Family Resource Center to serve as a hub for both community-building and information-sharing about available support resources. This center will be in partnership with East Flatbush Community Research School’s (EFCRS) Parent Coordinator. – Ongoing development Integrate parent supports based on the needs reported in University Settlement’s parent needs assessment. Programs could include: Adult Literacy, Project Home eviction prevention services, job readiness certifications and skills development, etc.- September 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DRP Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group Interim Assessments Literature Circles 1:1 tutoring Including Baseline Guided Reading ESLImagineLearning When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day Afterschool Mathematics DRP Scores iReady iReady Interim Assessments Imagine Math Including Baseline Science DRP Scores Urban Advantage Small Group During the school day Afterschool Small Group During the school day Afterschool Afterschool Small Group During the school day Afterschool Embedded in ELACurriculum Small Group During the school day Interim Assessments Including Baseline DRP Scores Interim Assessments Including Baseline Attendance Academic Anecdotals Skedula Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Behavioral Overcoming Anecdotals Obstacles SBST assessments Respect for All Ladder of Referral 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 15 students living in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Extended Learning Time, Housing Support, school supplies, and school uniforms. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School hiring committee is a part of the hiring process Recruitment Fairs Director of HR Teachers possess State Certified by Content 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). PD plan formed in the beginning of the year based on individual teacher, groups of teacher’s needs Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Staff Development Committees Peer/Model Teachers Teachers assist with Testing MOSL committee 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal 216, 220 19,091 0 X X X Column B Section Reference(s) educational software, textbooks, teaching artists supplies, instructional materials 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 0 12, 366 42, 469 X X X X Teacher salary, supplies 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. East Flatbush Community Research School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students East Flatbush Community Research School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Media, Law and Fine Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We are both a community and rise school meaning that we have a mandated expanded day program. This program runs seamlessly with New York Edge and University Settlement between the hours of 3pm-5:30 pm twice a week. The enrichment component is conducted by a team of certified pedagogues in multiple conent areas; which include: two English, two Social Studies,one Mathematics, one ENL, and one Special Ed teacher. The school provides 3-tiered intervention programs for ALL students. High level students on the 8th grade level on a Regents Track, there are 2 ELL students in this track. Instruction is held in English with mutltiple support entries in their native language. The supports include translated versions of texts, graphic organizers, and focused groupings based on English language proficiency. Many other ELLs are provided with focus instruction programs such as Imagine Learning and I- Ready. Imagine Learning caters to students who read at or between levels K-6 and I-Ready is geared towards students who read between levels 6-8. As students work through their individualized learning pathway, ongoing user-friendly assessments gather data on predictive and evaluative checkpoints. These checkpoints determine which upcoming lessons and instructional support options are best for each student. Teachers may also enable tri-annual, third-party measures for students via the Reading Level Assessment (RLA) and all students will take the Benchmark Test three times a year. This valuable data will allow us to make informed decisions regarding the placement of ELLs into the appropriate tiered level program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: The ENL and the Special Education teacher provide turnkey information from previous PDs attended to the other staff during the PD hours of 2:50pm-4:00pm on Mondays and Tuesdays. Co- teaching otherwise known as collaborative teaching is a topic consistently discussed and reviewed during the afternoon PD sessions. Best practices include how to determine pertinent language and content objectives. Designing and delivering tailored instruction based on the language proficiency level obtained from the NYSESLAT and elaborating on assessments that measure language acquisition. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Multiple events are held throughout the year in conjunction with the Parent Coordinator to create a culturally responsive environment for the whole East Flatbush community. These cultural gatherings allow for parental concerns and interests to be addressed in an inviting manner. Topics discussed include but are not limited to ELL placement, assessments, and cultural inclusion. Parents are notified about these events by the Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher through letters in their home language and in English; parents are also reached via telephone and text in their language of preference. These events are tailored to their working schedules and religious demands. On average, these celebrations run for approximately two hours. It is our belief that higher student success is only obtainable through parental involvement in the community. Our partnership with the Leadership Program, allows us to offer and/or host a variety of parental engagement workshops and activities. Topics are selected based on feedback from parents on surveys and/or culturally relevant issues/concerns existing within the community. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Afterschool/ Saturday Academy program for ELL’s Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $ 5,000  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $7,366 Travel Other TOTAL $1,999 $14,365 Imagine Math and Literacy Programs to support ELL Instruction Translation Services 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name East Flatbush Community Research School Borough Brooklyn School Number 581 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jameela Horton Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nathalie Granados Teacher/Subject Area ** / ** Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal Jaqueline Bell Coach type here School Counselor Tiffany Roy Parent *** Parent Coordinator Margaret Johnson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 275 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools that are used at the East Flatbush Community Research School, MS 581 are: Common Core Benchmark and Baseline Periodic Assessments, DRP (Degrees of Reading Power Assessment) and running records. There are no tests specifically tailored to ELLs that the school administers. Data from the DRP reveals that ELLs are reading below grade level. Running records help us to determine what specific grade level they are reading on. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  Student success is evaluated based on a combination of portfolios (portfolios include but are not limited to a beginning of the year baseline task to document student progress in descriptive writing and vocabulary use, quizzes, reading comprehension teacher created assessments, rubric based oral presentations to evaluate student speaking fluency progress, rubric based written taskes to evlauate writing fluency progress, and class work), report card grades to document progress of ELLS in the content areas and the NYSESLAT exam test scores evaluates students progress on an annual level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In general across proficiency levels and grades ELLs were weakest in writing followed by listening. Speaking followed by reading levels were the highest among ELLs across proficiency levels and grades. Across grade levels, there are eight students who scored Expanded on the NYSESLAT. One student tested out as Commanding. One eighth grader scored Transitioning. The majority of ELLs are at the Expanding level. The NYSITELL has not been administered as yet during the 2015-2016 school year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs receive services through a standalone ENL model. ELLs receive push-in ENL services during their ELA classes order to receive all of the federally mandated number of minutes. Those ELLs requiring more minutes also receive pull-out services in the form of their Intervention classes. Students receive small group instruction in groups of no larger than 6 students per class during pull-out services. During push-in services students receive either 1:1 direct reinforcement from the ENL support teacher of ELA content material or are grouped into small groups to receive reinforcement from the ENL support teacher during ELA. This is to provide individualized support to better meet all the ELLs' language acquistion needs. A content based, natural apprach is used to facilitate the ELLs' language development through the academic areas of ELA, Social Studies, Science and Mathematics. All ENL and content instruction is aligned with NYS standards and Common Core Curriculum. The goal is to facilitate language development while supporting students so they can master grade-level content knowledge. This interdisciplinary, standards-based approach allows students to meet performance standards and succeed on NYS and NYC assessments as well as be ready for college amd careers. Lastly, students are grouped heterogenously and are given the opportunity to interact daily and learn from their peers who are more proficient in English or who are native speakers. This facilitates their social and cultural competence of life in the United States as well as aides in their progress of achieving native-like fluency in English. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ELLs who scored Entering are entitled 360 minutes per week (180 of integrated ENL instruction and 180 of standalone ENL instruction). They receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction (during ELA) and 225 minutes of standalone instruction (during Intervention). The ELLs who scored Emerging are entitled to 360 minutes per week. They receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction (during ELA) and 225 minutes of standalone instruction (during Intervention). The ELL who scored Transitioning is entitled to 180 minutes per week. He receives 180 minutes of integrated instruction (during ELA) and 225 minutes of standalone instruction (during Intervention). TheELLs who scored Expanding are entitled to 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction per week. They receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction (during ELA). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher provides content area teachers with support by suggesting strategies that will assist students with experiencing success in the content area. Supports include, but are not limited to, web based resources, bilingual dictionary use and writing scaffolds. Additionally, the ENL teacher who provides push-in ENL services plans with content area teachers in order to ensure that all ELLs are receiving instruction that is appropriate, comprehensible and challenging linguistic needs. This can include scaffolding the work that non-ELLs are doing via the use of graphic organizers, sentence starters, etc. This can also include giving ELLs a completely separate task from non-ELLs if necessary. Instruction at the East Flatbush Community Research School, MS 581 is in English. In French class, instruction is in both English and French. A teaching methodology used throughout the school is the Workshop Model. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? While students are supported with Native Language resources throughout the year (e.g. bilingual dictionaries), ELLS are not evaluated by the school in their Native Language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are assigned to the ESL teacher's intervention group. During this time students work on developing their reading (e.g phonemic awareness), spelling, expanding their survival vocabulary as well as academic vocabulary and grammer (e.g. consturcting a complete sentence using standard English) through the Wilson Reading program. b. Newcomers are assigned tasks that will help them to learn basic English (e.g. survival words/phrases) c. High beginners through advanced level ELLS are assigned tasks that will help them to develop their literacy in English. In cases wher language development is not the primary issue, the ESL teacher will refer the student for testing to learn if he/she requires special services. d. Long-term ELLS are assigned tasks designed to target their literacy deficiencies and are also supported with test 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  taking/study skill strategies. e. In regards to former ELLS, the ESL teachers will check in with the student's content area teachers to learn how the child is performing in class and if necessary recommend possible strategies the content area teacher can try. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers follow the recommendations per the student's IEP in order to provide access to ELL-SWD to academic content and facilitate their language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ESL tacher refers to the IEPs of ELLS identified as having special needs in order to support their academic needs and goals while simultaneously facilitating their English language proficiency development. ELL-SWDs have access to everything their general education peers have access to. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs include: Wilson Reading System 5 days per week that provides ELLS with reading, writing, and vocabulary acquisition strategies as well as Guided Reading Program using the Engage and Excel curriculums, Achieve 3000, AVID and Math XL which is a computer intervention program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Turnaround Arts is a new progam that will be implemented in the upcoming school year to improve student achievement by infusing arts literarcy strategies into content area courses. the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project will serve as our ELA/literacy curriculum. We are also implementing the AVID program to provide our students with college and career readiness skillsets. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs or services for ELLS that are currently being discontinued at MS581. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are able and encouraged to participate in all extracurricular activities that their native speaking peers participate in. Sixth grade ELLS participate in MSQI. This is an academic/enrichment program. Activities include, but are not limited to cooking, drumming, basketball, etc. Seventh and eigth grade ELLS participate in 21st Century. This is an academic/enrichment program. Acitivities include, but are not limited to drumming, visual arts, chorus, debate team, step dance, cooking, newspaper club, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials available to support ELLS are bilingual dictionaries, leveled texts, laptops, iPads, and smartboards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Both ESL teachers speak French and are able to support the majority of the students (who are of Haitian decent) which helps bridge the language gap when necessary. Bilingual dictionaries and language translation apps are also used to help brigde language gaps. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Texts and web based resources are at an age and grade appropriate level. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials available to support ELLS are bilingual dictionaries, leveled texts, laptops, iPads, and smartboards. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently there are no activities in place to assist newly enrolled ELLS before the beginning of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently the language elective that is being offered to ELLS is French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL teachers wil be participating in various PD opportunities offered thought the NYC Department of Education, Teachers College Reading and Writing Program, Turnaround Arts, Middle School Quality Iniative, and that the school administration idenfities for the staff throughout the 2015-2016 school year. The ELL support is offered to teachers of ELLS by MS 581's Borough Field Support Center - ESL compliance specialist, Middle School Quality Initiative, Turnaround Arts, and Teachers College. Support includes, but is not limited to: our of school workshops on making modifications to lesson plans to provide all students access, whole staff professional development on implementing a SIOP model, using art to teach vocabulary and discussion protocols, classroom visitations and individual planning and support. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Guidance Counselor at MS 581meets 1:1 with students for career and goal counseling. She also works with students to assist them with enrolling in the best High School that will meet their personal, social and career needs. During class discussions about student goals andandplans the ESL teacher also discusses with 7th graders about ihe importance of doing well in order to be able to enroll in a good high school. The ESL teacher also discusses with 8th graders the improtance of doing well and working to test out of ESL so they will be able to take more credit for graduation courses once they reach high school. The school Social Worker is also available to support ELL transitions. The 7.5 hours of ELL training is provided by MS 581's Borough field Support Center's ESL compliace specialist when he comes to the school to facilitate staff professional development and conduct classroom visitations to provide teachers with instructional feedback and support. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ELL parents are part of the SLT Team (school leadership team). This group meets with administration and discusses the needs of the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are encourgaed to take part in all activities planned by the school. The school reaches out via newsletter, phone blast, and Skedula to inform parents about events and their childs progress. Blackboard connect and Skedula offer native language options for reach out. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daveida Daniel, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18k581 School Name: East Flatbush Community Research Sc Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Christopher Padmore Assistant Principal Michelle Vera ENL Teacher No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During their first visit to East Flatbush Community Research School, MS 581, parents and families are welcomed by our school secretary and parent coordinator. Our parent coordinator works with our certified ENL teacher, Michelle Vera, to administer the Home Language Identification survey. If necessary, an interpreter is provided to assist the parents in completing the forms included in our welcome packet which include: Student Emergency Contact cards, Parent Survey, After-school enrollment form, lunch form, and other documents. Bi-lingual versions of our enrollment form (provided by the Department of Education) are available. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Haitian Creole English Spanish 11 9 171 6 5.47 4.48 85.07 2.99 11 10 164 6 5.47 4.98 81.59 2.99 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families   The following documents are distributed yearly: September PupilPath log-in and access information The EFCRS Parent Handbook Various notices Various notices regarding events during the expanded day program such as (but not limited to): Trips, Student performances, and celebrations. Please note that our parents have not requested to have any correspondence translated. The following documents are distributed monthly: Every month School Calendar/Student Calendar   Progress Reports  Parent Newsletter How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parents have not requested translated versions of any documentation. However; our Skedula platform can translate documents if requested. Parents have not requested translated versions of any documentation. However; our Skedula platform can translate documents if requested. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96 Parents have not requested translated versions of any documentation. However; our Skedula platform can translate documents if requested. Parents have not requested translated versions of any documentation. However; our Skedula platform can translate documents if requested. The following documents are distributed quarterly:  Report Cards February  November   April June  Various notices regarding events in day school such as (but not limited to): Distributed prior to the event taken place. time frame varies. Parent-Teacher Conferences Curriculum nights Family science night Publishing parties State exam testing dates Parent workshops Trips and celebrations 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Staff members.. Examples of our formal face-to-face meetings are: Every month Student Orientation - usually held the last week in August Monthly Parent Leadership workshops Fall Parent-Teacher Conferences - November 18 th Spring Parent-Teacher Conference March 16 th School Leadership Team meetings - every third Wednesday of the month Parent-Teacher Association meetings - every third Wednesday of the month 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  Fall Curriculum Night - September 16 th Spring Student lead Conferences - May 11 th Weekly parent appointments meetings during grade team meetings -Every Tuesday during parent outreach Family Science Night - date may vary Student IEP meetings (varies) Examples of our informal face-to-face meetings are: Student pick-up from after-school programming Parents requesting a meeting with our Parent Coordinator or Guidance Counselor Parent participation in school-wide celebrations or classroom celebrations Student publishing parties in ELA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use the IO- Skedula platform to communicate with limited English -proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We review the documentation during of Fall Chancellor's Conference Day. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon entry onto our floor, parents are directed to the main office where they are provided with the Parent Guide to Language Access. Parents are asked to fill out the HLIS for students who may be possible ELLs. This survey and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  interview are conducted by a certified ENL teacher. If necessary, an interpretator is provided to assist the parents in completing the forms. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? As a school, we administer surveys to our parents cyclically to gather feedback on the quality or services offered as well as their interests. Our Community Schools director compiles the data from these surveys to inform future decisions regarding supports and programs offered. We've recently hired a Family Worker who works with our Parent Coordinator, and Community Associate to conduct parent outreach such as phone calls and home visits. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99 
