2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K582 School Name: M.S. 582 Principal: JEFFREY MERCED 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information MS582-The Magnet School for Technology, Multimedia and Urban Planning 331400010582 6-8 School Number (DBN): 14K582 207 Bushwick Ave., Brooklyn, N.Y., 11206 718-456-8220 Fax: 718-456-8218 Phone Number: Danielle Capuano Dcapuan@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jeffrey Merced Carlos Garcia JhonathanCaro Nichole Cicileo Patricia Lopez n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 14 Mrs. Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 11206 Superintendent’s Office Address: Awinnic@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7600 Phone Number: 718-302-7978 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2587 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JeffreyMerced Carlos Garcia JonathonCaro N/A N/A Danielle Capuano Nichole Cicileo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, Member/ Assistant Principal Chairperson/Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Patricia Lopez RebeccaDelgado YarithzaSihuanca Evelyn Rivera Ebony Edwards AeishaBailey Monica Buono Parent Member /School secretary Parent Parent Parent Parent/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Middle School 582 - The Magnet School for Multimedia, Technology and Urban Planning Section 4: SCEP Overview At MS 582, everyone – student, teacher, parent – is both learner and teacher. All members of the MS 582 learning community are everyday, as well as, life-long learners. Our focus is on student achievement through academics, attendance, and attitude. The most important part of any day is the learning that occurs in our classrooms. We educate our students to think critically and make what they believe in happen as productive members of a global culture. Middle School 582 - Magnet School for Multimedia, Technology and Urban Planning students maximize their potential through the production of quality work and their ability to share and reflect on their experience. The MS 582 belief is in excellence for every student in every classroom. Each child is valued as an individual with unique characteristics to be developed and enhanced. We promote high expectations for student success in a safe environment. Our entire learning community celebrates and supports each student. We will continue to provide a caring and nurturing environment that empowers all children, including English Language Learners and students with special needs, our students experience greater success and confidence in themselves, allowing them to grow socially, emotionally, and academically into well-rounded, productive citizens. Through high quality classroom instruction, before and after school programs, academic intervention services, social activities, clubs and teams, we equip our children with lifelong skills for success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual Information: MS582 -The Magnet School for Multi-Media, Technology and Urban Planning is a PROSE Middle School located in the East Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, New York. We currently share a building with our partner school, Public School 196. Both schools focus on excellence for all students and share an amicable working relationship. MS582 has recently become a Magnet school for Technology, Multimedia and Urban Planning. Our last Quality Review was great with 3 “Well developed” ratings out of 5! As a district 14 middle school which opened in September of 2004, we serve a population of roughly 280 students in the 6 th, 7 th and 8 th grade. Approximately 72% of the community members are of Latino descent and approximately 23% are African American with a small percentage from Asian and European cultures. 53.4% of the student population is male and 46.6% is female. Approximately 31% of the students have Individualized Education Programs (IEP’s) and receive services including Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), an integrated Co-Teaching/ Inclusive model (ICT) class on each of the three grades, a self-contained class on grade 6, grade 7 and grade 8 and related services such as Occupational therapy, speech and language, and counseling. In addition, 11% are English Language Learners (ELL’s) with Spanish as the dominant language. Roughly 98% of the student population is from low income families who are eligible for free lunch. MS582~is a Magnet School for Technology, Multi-Media and Urban Planning. We have 13 classes across the 6 th, 7 th , and 8 th grades. There are five (5) 6 th grade classes , four (4) 7 th grade classes and four (4) 8 th grade classes which 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  are heterogeneously grouped. Average class size is 25 students. On each grade, there is one ICT class and one self contained class. We were selected by NY Cares to become a partner in their NY Cares School Success Initiative. This helped our students understand the larger world outside the classroom as they worked with volunteers from various corporations to understand science, finance, volunteerism and even built spaghetti bridges during our Junior Achievement Day. The NYC Commission on Human Rights selected us to become one of the few middle schools with a student trained and run Peer Mediation Program. Our students went through a training program that is nationally recognized to become peer mediators. Our ten “Peer Mediators” work tirelessly to resolve disputes. This year, we will be adding Restorative Justice practices to their repertoire of strategies. Through our Advisory Program and the implementation of the Leader In Me , we focus on self esteem , accountability, responsibility and college and career skills that support the whole child , especially their social and emotional development. Through “Bulldog Pride” we are able to tackle subjects like bullying, and goal setting throughout the year. In an effort to fully embrace the Chancellor’s Framework for Great schools and build heavily upon the trust component we have improved our Advisory Program. For the 2018-2019 school year, the advisory program’s goal will be to establish a trusting relationship between students and teachers that ensure a child’s growth in the areas of respect, honesty and integrity. The advisor will serve as a mentor who builds trust by creating a risk-free learning environment and providing support for individual students. The teacher will show this support by assisting with academics, personal growth and teaching the student how to learn to use strategies that can be used to handle conflicts that occur in their lives. The student will form a relationship with their advisor that would allow them to talk to the teacher about issues they may have, and the teacher takes responsibility for those students in his/her advisory in a supportive, nurturing way. The vision of the advisory program is that each student at MS 582 has at least one adult that knows him/her well and the student feels that the teacher is someone to be trusted. Each advisor will be given a binder set up as follows: students, parent contact log, anecdotal, attendance, and lessons. By having the advisor as the primary contact with parents, it allows parents one specific person who is an advocate for the child and can update and inform parents of how the child is getting along and progressing at school. In 2016, we became a Magnet school for Technology, Multimedia and Urban Planning. As a result, we have established partnerships and residencies with over 14 CBO's . We specialize in educating our students for college and career paths related to Technology, Multimedia and Urban Planning such as Architecture, engineering, urban planning, government, media, technology, and beyond...these are just some of the new and exciting topics students engage in here at MS 582. With project based learning at the forefront, students work with teachers and professionals through our new community partnerships to explore these concepts. Learning through this hands on approach will help students see the world as professionals, promote the 21st century skills of communication, critical thinking, collaboration, and creativity, as well as exposing students to college and career opportunities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  ELA Students explore the concept of urban planning through the analysis of various texts and multimedia sources. Students will engage in discussion based around the themes of urban planning, architecture, community planning, civics, and government, engage in fictional, argumentative and informational writing, as well as develop projects that connect to our urban planning theme. Projects include social issue awareness campaigns, project proposals, and digital photo story telling. MATH Students explore standards based mathematical concepts as they relate to engineering, architecture, and urban planning. Students will engage in class discussions, self/peer evaluations and revisions, and work collaboratively as they apply standard based mathematics to real world situations and problem solving concepts. Projects include development of landmarks/ monuments, scaled skyscraper models, and bridges. SCIENCE As students study concepts such as simple machines, weather, scientific method, and human impact, they will relate these concepts to our school’s theme of urban planning and technology. Students will plan and design inventions, technology, and ideas that can help improve communities. Projects include the development of complex machines with simple machines and earthquake resistant structures. SOCIAL STUDIES Students study and explore ancient civilizations, geography, American history, and government. Keeping the concept of urban planning, technology and multimedia in mind, students will think about urban planning as it connects to culture, city planning, government, civil rights, and present day. Projects include model home design, Morse code and propaganda, and laser cutting architectural structures. ART Students analyze their community as urban planners, engineers, and architects. Students will use the influence of their community to inspire their creativity while creating their projects. Through the artistic process, students will explore many different concepts of these professions including engineering, design, media, etc. Projects include digital photo essays, and marketing/advertisement utopian societies. Hydroponics In our Hydroponic Lab, students learn about hydroponic technology, nutrition, healthy eating, and meal planning. Furthermore, students will learn how to develop, utilize, and sustain hydroponic technology encouraging students to create solutions for global resource problems. Projects include harvesting, then preparing healthy recipes using the ingredients, and eventually feeding the homeless. We are fortunate to have a dedicated and involved PTA endeavoring to keep all parents informed about their children’s education. They are an integral part of our School Leadership Team that meets regularly on a monthly basis to discuss ways to improve instruction , school culture and student performance. In addition to their vital role as co- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  teachers for their children and fundraisers for our school, PTA members also serve as translators for our parents and staff. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population is 72% Hispanic, 23% Black and 3% White. Approximately 31% of the students have Individualized Education Programs (IEP’s) and receive services including Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) and ICT. We have an integrated Co-Teaching/ Inclusive model (ICT) class on each of the three grades, a self-contained class on grade 6, grade 7 and grade 8 and related services such as Occupational therapy, speech and language, and counseling. In addition, 11% are English Language Learners (ELL’s) with Spanish as the dominant language. Approximately 31% of our SWD students have special needs and receive services such as SETSS, ICT, Speech and Language. MS582 provides services and supports for our special student populations for ENL ,SETSS, ICT and self contained students. The settings we offer for our for our 89 students with IEP's range from General education classes with SETSS, ICT and Self-Contained classes such as 12:1 and 12:1:1. Additionally, we offer a free standing ENL program for our 41 ENL students, whose levels include (1) Entering, (4) Emerging, (10) Transitioning, (20) Expanding and (6) Commanding. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Last year , we made the most progress with the Collaborative teaching element of the Framework for Great Schools and we will continue on our focus on collaborative teachers this year and build capacity even more by helping teachers acquire skills and expertise by providing opportunities for them to develop, grow, and learn from peers and experts. We will also emphasize the Trust element of the Framework for Great Schools this year. Our teachers must be committed to student success and driven to improve our school. We will continue to support our teachers in order to strengthen their craft and hone their practice through continuous learning and frequent professional learning opportunities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K582 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 265 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 33 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.9% % Reduced Lunch 13.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 69.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.05 11% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 43 92.2% 0.4% 33.6% 23.8% 1.9% 1.5% 4 32% 6.4 25.6% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3.2 Based on the data from our last Quality Review, our last Central Led Review, the NYC School Quality Guide, the Instructional Reports, our NYC School Survey , the NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self Reflection Tool and student performance data from the NYS exams , our targeted subgroups are ENL students and special education students , as well as any student who did not achieve a level 3 or higher on the NYS assessments in Math, ELA and Science. Based on data from observations and Advance, our priority needs for this school year for all staff are the embedment of formative assessment practices in every lesson, building capacity, differentiating instruction, and LASW . The administration and staff fully support the implementation of quality rigorous and differentiated curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) across content areas guided by the instructional shifts. Based on the needs assessment and last year’s goals of deepening the instructional work that focused on reading and writing and in an effort to improve student achievement, we developed 2018-2019 goals. These goals center on the instructional core across all classrooms. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Our student data from the state test results , including student growth and performance, indicates that 30% met State standards on the State English test and 8% of students met the State standards for Math on the State test. We believe that students learn best when the classroom is student centered and students take responsibility for their education. Students learn best when they are engaged in rigorous hands on activities and partner/group collaboration. Our classroom practices are aligned with our school beliefs and are informed by the Citywide Instructional Expectations, the Chancellor’s Capacity Framework, the Danielson Framework for Teaching and the Instructional Shifts Across all disciplines can be seen in student portfolios that contain PBL tasks, writing pieces, assessments, student notebooks, displayed student work and lesson plans. Our instructional focus is to continue develop our students’ critical thinking skills with a focus on close reading and student lead discussions while working with staff to develop higher level questioning ability that will lead to greater student academic achievement. Our curricula units of study are common core aligned and focus on higher order thinking skills through questioning and discussion. Our instructional strategies provide multiple entry points to engage learners. Our student data content tracker sheet is a tool used by teachers during conferring in order to document student strengths and weaknesses and inform future planning of instruction 3.3 Curriculum maps are developed and revised as needed based on student needs and progress before, during and after each unit. teachers work with administrators and lead teachers to revise curriculum and integrate our magnet themes into their scope and sequence. An important aspect of curriculum planning and writing that is related to the instructional core for 2018-2019 is for teachers and school leaders to provide specific and actionable feedback that will inform next steps for learning. Our focus on all forms of feedback and formative assessment informs the development of individualized instructional plans and unit plans that include appropriate scaffolds, a variety of instructional strategies, DOK questions to promote critical thinking and student discussion that will ensure access, support and extension for all learners, including SWD’s & ELL’s to the rigorous common core aligned curricula. Teachers follow a template for pacing and planning that includes all components of a detailed CCLS lesson with differentiation and multiple entry points for students that integrates the Magnet themes using a PBL approach. CCLS lessons focus on close reading, vocabulary, and various instructional strategies in all subjects that emphasize writing, DOK questioning and accountable talk. All lessons include formative assessments such as exit slips, differentiated learning activities based on Blooms taxonomy/ DOK wheel and conferring. Across all classrooms we use accountable talk prompts, evidenced based discussions and differentiated grouping with scaffolded supports in all content areas including our college and career readiness program and advisory. 3.4 All teachers meet across subjects and grades to plan, support and extend lessons using an integrated magnet thematic and interdisciplinary approach that incorporates topics explored in Life Skills, Technology, Advisory, and Art with the core subjects. 3.5 All teachers are engaged in Professional Learning Collaborative Teams that meet weekly across all disciplines and grades to systematically analyze student data and promote achievement of school goals and instructional capacity of teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Quality Review indicator 2.2 is an area of focus for our school. This school year, we have developed our instructional focus around vocabulary and writing across all content areas. We are providing teachers with professional learning opportunities on how to use assessments to understand student progress, create and plan purposeful groups that target students specific deficiencies ,adjust instructional decisions to support student growth and track progress. Teachers work in teams engaged in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom instruction. Department teams focus on instructional practices that will improve students’ critical thinking skills by increasing the rigor of their tasks, promoting and elevating the level of student discussions and having students self assess using rubrics aligned to the common core. Teams engage in collaborative inquiry that supports goals and strengthens capacity. Teams analyze student data improve curricula , teaching and learning. Through the observation process, the inquiry process, LASW, student assessment data, and portfolio reviews in collaborative team meetings we examine and track student growth to monitor progress and make adjustments as needed. While deepening teacher understanding of the CCLS, Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Instructional Shifts and The Capacity Framework we are building teacher capacity within each instructional team in order to distribute leadership. Lead teachers facilitate teacher team meetings that analyze student data to identify student weaknesses and implement an instructional change that will impact student learning. The identified priority need that is addressed in the goal is the overall implementation of instructional practices that will ensure multiple points of entry, support and extension for all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in all subgroups in grades 6-8 will demonstrate a 3% increase in the number of students performing at proficiency level 3 as measured by the NYS Math assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Math department will develop a baseline/ benchmark mock NYS math assessment that assesses the standards and evaluates student understanding of key concepts. Math staff and students Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, PCT, math teachers Math department team will work collaboratively to analyze student performance data and continuously revise curricula in order to improve student mastery of the common core and performance standards and address the achievement gaps. Teachers will monitor student progress in each specific standard daily and weekly through "mastery challenges", conferring and other formative assessment practices . Teachers will participate in cross curricular planning sessions and Learning Walks to share best instructional practices that support and enhance the integration of math concepts and connections across the curriculum and overall improve pedagogy. Teachers will analyze the progression of the key standards , and determine and prioritize the skills ENL and SWD students need to master at each grade level. Based on the data, teachers will develop and implement differentiated small group/individual strategy lessons to target each subgroup's needs and promote their growth. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Math staff and students Sept 2018-June 2019, daily Principal, Assistant Principals, PCT's, math teachers All Staff All Staff Sept 2018-June 2019, weekly All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals, Sept 2018-June 2019, weekly All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principals, How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MS582 works closely with our Community school personnel to assist families with understanding Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core to support their children at home. The key personnel responsible for overseeing this is the Principal ,Assistant Principals, teachers and Grand Street Settlement partners who will work with Lead Teachers and PCT teachers to prepare and provide learning opportunities for parents on a variety of topics on Curriculum and Instruction, Strategies for Close Reading, Understanding the Common Core Standards and Ways to help your child with homework during PTA meetings. These workshops will be held in September, November, February, and May. The Parent Coordinator and administration will be responsible for implementation and oversight of family events and workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher lesson plans ,student's notebooks, Math units of study, curriculum maps, teacher observations , student class work, PBA's, assessments indicating student growth. Math Teachers , Math Supervisor,Math Lead Teacher, Afterschool Program, Teacher Per Session, Supervisor per session, CCLS lesson plans, Danielson Framework for teaching and learning, Advance , Chancellor’s Four Pillars, CCLS lesson plans, Math MOSL Baseline and Benchmark assessment data. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Benchmarks are set to review progress in January . September Math Baseline results will be compared to benchmark results in January to assess student progress over the last 5 months. Mid-point benchmark check point data will be analyzed along with formative data at department and SLT meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock NYS Math Benchmark Assessments administered in September ,January and May. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The area of focus for the Supportive Environment Framework Element for this year is movement of students with special needs to less restrictive environments. According to the School Quality Snapshot , we received a Fair rating in the Less Restrictive Environment section. The Leader in Me Program will be implemented primarily through the Advisory program as well as through all aspects of our educational program and we feel this will lead to students exhibiting high levels of autonomy and self esteem , which in turn , will lead to improved behaviour and better decision making skills. These attributes will positively impact our students' way of dealing with conflict and improve student behaviour. Many of our special needs students have IEP's for behavioural reasons. Additionally, we have become a community school and have access to many resources that we did not have in previous years such as a full time social worker. Our social worker, Meghan is available for crisis intervention as well as daily therapeutic sessions for students that need more support throughout the day. Through the Community Schools initiative, we now offer in class tutors for ENL and special needs students during ELA and Math, Mental Health services, medical (dental and vision) services, and parent and family support services for attendance and family well being. We believe that with Leader In Me program and all the resources currently available at MS582, we will be able to effectively move students with special needs to less restrictive environments throughout this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  5.2 The advisory Program’s goal is to establish a trusting relationship between students and teachers that ensure a child’s growth in the areas of respect, honesty and integrity. The advisor serves as a mentor who builds trust by creating a risk-free learning environment and providing support for individual students. The teacher shows this support by assisting with academics, personal growth and teaching the student how to learn to use strategies that can be used to handle conflicts that occur in their lives. The student forms a relationship with their advisor that would allow them to talk to the teacher about issues they may have, therefore lowering the rate of conflicts in the building. The Advisory curriculum has a different topic each month that is explored and discussed as well as goal-setting embedded within lesson plans that allow the students to take ownership of their learning in order to accelerate their progress. 5.3 MS582 offers a Life Skills program 2x per week to offer students and staff alike an opportunity to experience permanent learning in the classical sense and a connection through activities that are enjoyable and peak student’s interest while building their social skills . 5.4 In addition, we also work with Grand Street Settlement , our community schools partner on initiatives such as the Success Mentoring Program, which pairs up school staff ,members with students who have chronic absences. Our partnership with St. Nick's Alliance has provided us with funding for additional teachers for the ELA and Math Test Sophistication after school program. Additionally, NYCares in cooperation with Ernst and Young, provide 3 annual full day lessons through “Young Achievers” to all of our students with a focus on College and Career Readiness . 5.5 Teacher teams focus on common assessment analysis that leads to implications for curriculum pacing and instructional decisions. Teachers use instructional reports, benchmark data, standards based mastery challenge data, unit assessments, and exit tickets to inform their flexible groups and instructional strategies. The school and inquiry teams across all content areas track student progress through formative and summative assessments such as MOSLS and PBL tasks. Teacher teams utilize a “Looking at Student Work” protocol, analyze data from instructional reports and baseline an benchmark assessments, review student notebooks, common assessments and portfolios. They analyze differentiated activities reflected in lesson plans, flexible grouping for instruction, multiple points of entry, conferring notes, and exit slips for effectiveness. Student work has evidence of student self-assessment as well as teacher evaluation and effective feedback based on rubrics. Teams work to develop and revise future lesson plans based on student outcomes. All students with disabilities have IEP’s that target learning objectives for their social, emotional and academic needs. Grand street provides our students with supports for the social and emotional aspects of their development, which strengthens our ability to educate the whole child. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MS582 will implement a Three Tiered Intervention approach in accordance with the instructional framework as measured by a 5% increase on the DRP benchmark for all students in grades 6-8 demonstrating growth in reading informational text and mastery of academic vocabulary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement a cross curricular thematic as well as academic vocabulary program by grade level using technology and other strategies (i.e.Word Generation). All staff will participate in professional learning that focuses on Tier I, II and III Intervention strategies that include Fountas & Pinnell , Guided Reading , close reading , Wilson, close reading, vocabulary, jigsaw, fishbowls, literature circles and other reciprocal teaching strategies. and MSQI supplementary resources. Teachers working in teams will create and differentiate lessons that focus on all 3 tiers of intervention including whole group, small group and individual instruction. Implement Life skills and Advisory programs 1-2x per week to address students social and emotional growth. Conduct walk through focused on the implementation of Tier I, II and III Intervention strategies that support ENL and SWD students. Debrief sessions that will highlight best practices at each level of intervention for each subgroup. Implement a variety of Looking at Student Work protocols for identifying gaps in pedagogy and student understanding so that target goals can be set for student improvement. Workshops for parents to understand the interventions that their children are receiving and how best to support their academic development, more specifically, their child's goal of increasing 5% on the DRP in May. Administrators will provide all teachers with professional learning on Universal Screening for diagnosis, goal setting and implementing tiered interventions for literacy. All students will be Universally Screened three times a year in grades six through eight. Using the results of the screening, grade level literacy benchmarks, NYS English Language Arts Assessments, and classroom performance, students are placed in one of the following tiers: Tier 1 – progressing as expected with instruction provided within the classroom Tier 2 – additional support with targeted instruction. This can be in the form of small group instruction, additional instructional time, or a variety of other interventions both within and outside of the classroom. Tier 3 – students not adequately Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Staff Sept.2018-June 2019 Bi-monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, PCT Teachers All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Daily Principal, Assistant Principals,Teachers, including support staff Parents All Staff Sept. 2018-June 2019 Bi-monthly Principal, Assistant Principals,Teachers, SLT, PTA Sept. 2018-June 2019 Monthly Principal, Assistant Principals,PCT Teachers, Teachers, ENL teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  progressing in Tier 2 services or who have qualified by the results of scores are provided with more intense and frequent intervention services often with specialized program or materials. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. MS582 will engage and support our parents understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home through our parent workshops on the Leader in Me, parent meetings, and parent outreach . Our Community School personnel will work with us to educate our parents and provide numerous resources for parents to help them understand how to support their children academically, socially and emotionally. Parent Workshops will be conducted to inform the parents of our Leader in Me Program , Advisory Program , Dog Therapy Program and Life Skills Program and how these programs help to provide a supportive Environment for students and parents alike. The Lighthouse Team , the Parent coordinator and the administration will be responsible for oversight and implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. After school and Saturday programs, Grand Street tutoring, ELA teachers, Assistant Principal, Principal, ELA PCT teacher , After school teacher per session, supervisor per session. Saturday Academy (20 Saturdays/3 hours each) taught by approximately 6 teachers, funded through Achieve Now Grant. After School Program for Instruction (2 days a week, 2.5 hrs per day; for 39 weeks) taught by approximately 8 teachers, funded through Magnet and St.Nick's Alliance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. DRP Benchmarks are set to review progress in February. DRP September Baseline results will be compared to benchmark results in January to assess the progress toward a 5% increase in May. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. DRP data will be used to assess progress.Formative assessment data from guided reading groups and small group strategy lessons will be used during the school year to adjust and revise interventions and learning activities in order to impact student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 4.2 Upon a careful review and analysis of our 2017-2018 Instructional Reports, the 2018NYC School Survey results, our previous Quality Review and central led review recommendations, and the NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection and Advance data, our school developed our instructional focus which is to support students in learning, developing and applying academic vocabulary throughout their daily learning experiences to enhance their written and verbal communication skills. We also developed our Mission Statement which is to embed Project Based Learning and technology use into educational opportunities that support student achievement with a pedagogical focus on vocabulary, writing and targeted academic interventions. Through an interdisciplinary, coherent curricula, our students will experience a hands on, theme based approach to learning while engaging in meaningful discourse. Our vision is to cultivate an equitable learning community for all stake-holders that fosters academic excellence and student voice. Our theory of Action states that ..If the MS582 community encourages, models, and embeds the use of academic language and vocabulary...Then students will engage in meaningful discourse , So that self efficacy is developed for Clarity of Purpose. The outbranch of all of this led our school community to develop a shared understanding of effective, coherent instruction. Working collaboratively with our Lead Teachers and PCT's , we conduct professional development for teachers on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching in September to re-engage teachers with the goals of their practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  The principal and assistant principals conduct IPC’s which center around Danielson’s rubric, where the teachers discuss their strengths and weaknesses related to Danielson’s Framework. This work continues through weekly team meetings and Monday PLC meetings which focus on teacher practice and student work. The administration also conducts observations and offers feedback to teachers on their observations, lesson plans, student work, classroom environment and culture, and student notebooks. We also believe in classroom inter-visitation by staff to observe other staff members followed by discussion. The impact of this work to date can be seen in the rigor of the curricula across all classrooms. It can also be seen during students working in purposeful groups on critical thinking tasks. In order to monitor student progress, benchmarks are set for December and February. The administration works with teachers during curriculum planning sessions for integrating our Magnet theme of urban Planning into all other subjects, implementing gold Standard PBL units and lessons, implementing reciprocal Teaching strategies and interdisciplinary lessons that incorporate thematic and academic vocabulary on a daily basis. 4.4. Our instructional focus is that MS582 will support students in learning, developing and applying academic vocabulary throughout their daily learning experiences to enhance their written and verbal communication skills. Administrators and teachers ensure that daily lesson plans include student to student discussion, vocabulary strategies , skill based learning objectives and differentiation that provides scaffold for struggling students , as well as scaffolds that target high achievers. Teachers will view assessment through an inquiry lens , in order to adjust instructional practices that will ensure engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula that is accessible to a variety of learners and aligned to the CCLS. Teachers in all content areas create common core PBA tasks for every unit. Teachers utilize a variety of formative assessments . Instructional strategies such as jigsaw, fishbowl, literature circles, reciprocal teaching, front end and back end scaffolding graphic organizers and differentiated learning tasks are used to promote multiple points of entry, support and extension. 4.5 Common assessment analysis’ drives instructional adjustments across each grade and subject areas. Formative assessments in the form of checks for understanding, exit slips, conferring notes, students responses, and student self assessment lead to effective lesson adjustments. Rubrics are used to evaluate PBA’s and develop effective feedback to provide students with next steps. Teacher teams focus on common assessment analysis that leads to implications for content decisions and instruction. Teachers use assessment results to inform their instructional groups and strategies. The school and inquiry teams across all content areas track student progress through formative and summative assessments such as MOSLS and PBA tasks. Teacher teams utilize a “Looking at Student Work” protocol, and review student notebooks, common assessments and portfolios. They analyze differentiated activities reflected in lesson plans, flexible grouping for instruction, multiple points of entry, conferring notes, and exit slips for effectiveness. Student work has evidence of student self-assessment as well as teacher evaluation and effective feedback based on rubrics. Teams work to develop and revise future lesson plans based on student outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will work in teams to develop and implement the Magnet curriculum themed project based learning (PBL) tasks. Subsequently, students will also demonstrate their ability to participate and engage in their PBL activities and tasks. This will be measured by 100% of teachers developing at least 2 units of their curriculum that are magnet integrated using the PBL approach. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All department teams will will engage in Professional Learning sessions on the integration of the Magnet Curriculum themes into their existing units using the PBL approach to instruction. All teachers will engage in writing and revising curriculum utilizing a project based learning approach that will include hands-on tasks, rubrics,formative and summative assessments , differentiated learning activities and conferring practices used to track student progress and inform future planning. All Staff All Staff Sept.2018-June 2019 Daily Sept.2018-June 2019 Daily Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead teachers, teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead teachers, teachers Core subject teachers will participate in a Magnet partnership residency for at least one PBL Unit , collaborating with our partners in planning and lesson implementation. Core subject teachers Sept.2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal , Staff , teacers Monthly Provide workshops for parents on how to support their child's academic development and growth. All staff Sept.2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals,Teachers, Monthly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MS582 will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home through parent outreach on Tuesdays throughout the entire year, parent meetings , parent orientation in September, October and November Family Night and Middle School Experience events throughout the year with St Nick's Alliance, Open houses for parents every Thursday between 9-11:00 am, as well as workshops provided by MS582 Staff and Grand Street Settlement staff , school wide family events such as International Food Day and our annual Fall Festival. Student of the Month Assemblies are fused into our monthly PTA Meetings to further build on our relationship with all stakeholders. The key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight is the administration and Parent Coordinator. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal and Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, Danielson Framework, Advance , CCLS PBL Lesson plans, student PBA 's, curriculum writing teacher per session, supervisor per session and completed curriculum maps including PBL unit plans and lesson plans. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will have participated and worked collaboratively in weekly planning sessions with their department and Learning Walks in the core subjects in order to identify and include impactful pedagogical approaches for the development and implementation of at least one of their PBL Units that integrates Magnet themes into their scope and sequence. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Each department creating with their team curriculum maps indicating 2 PBL units that integrate Urban Planning and corresponding unit and lesson plans for each PBL unit . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data from our prior Quaity Review, Advance , the 2018 School Quality Guide and the 2017-2018 PPO results, our coaching learning walks and observations focus primarily on the following overarching themes: . The Learning Environment . Visible student supports . Visible, positive expectations for behavior and task . Evidence of student work . Visible teaching points, essential questions, agendas . Teacher Responsibilities & Expectations . Establishing a culture for learning . Effective communication with students . Lesson pace & effective use of space . Student Response(s) as a result of Teacher Planning and Delivery . Students intellectually engaged in content . Student ownership of material and tasks 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  . Ongoing Assessment . Clearly established criteria for success . Proximity & variety . Student Tasks and Work Samples . Management of groups and routines . Fostering independence & ownership . Cognitive complexity From this, overall and specific areas of strength and concern is revealed and our coaching efforts support these needs. Learning Environment The structures and routines that have been established outside of the classrooms (hallway protocols, strategically placed and proficient security and support staff, etc.) present a strong foundation from which teachers and students benefit and it is apparent that the expectations for learning are high. The investment from the administration to the success of the teachers is clear and consistent with best practice. The students and teachers display a mutual respect with the administration as a result of their visibility and involvement in the school’s daily functions. Glows: The learning environments were both visually and instructionally engaging. The seating arrangements were appropriate to the type of instruction and related tasks. Each room presented a safe and structure learning environment. The teachers were clear in their instructional goals and 80% of the rooms had all instructional supports (agendas, teaching points, etc.) posted and visible for the whole lesson. Grows: Although the rooms were visually “active” and represented a lot of care and effort, they need more “studentcenteredness.”involved with the formation of procedures, routines, or posted supports. We have identified Targets for Improvement - crafting assessments (on going and formative ) which connect to the rigor of the learning target - using instructional strategies and appropriate routines to make rigorous content accessible to all students (multiple entry points) - writing instruction across all content areas - math instruction - teacher purposeful planning for various groups of students - formative assessment practices in all lessons daily - Backwards Planning for curriculum mapping - crafting lesson activities that promote student to student discourse - Improved student class interaction leading to improved student outcomes; ie classwork, test, and grades 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will use formative classroom based measures and observations to evaluate the growth of students and responsively provide S.M.A.R.T. feedback , both orally and written, to increase student engagement and achievement as measured by 80% of our students achieving a 5% increase on the Performance Series (Local MOSL). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and PCT's will provide staff with professional development and coaching to raise the quality of feedback given to students and strengthen teacher instructional capacity. All staff will be provided with monthly professional development time to look at student work using the established LASW protocol (and the LCI protocol) so that feedback to students is normed and calibrated among staff and this collaborative inquiry leads to improving the quality of feedback given to students. Teachers will plan and implement individual conferring sessions with each student to provide oral and written feedback with next steps toward their learning goals based on the teacher's evaluation of the student's learning needs. All teachers will engage in conferring practices daily to track student progress and inform future planning. Administrators will review teacher's conferring notes during observations. Through Advance observations , administrators will provide staff with specific, targeted feedback and coaching that is normed and calibrated among leadership to increase and raise the rigor of instructional practices through: )1). affirming positive practices throughout lessons, (2.) identifying missed opportunities (3.)posing questions for teacher reflection. Regular and meaningful feedback to teachers will allow leadership to push for greater instructional improvements as it also supports teacher growth and builds capacity and coherence. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Staff Sept 2018- June 2019 weekly Principal , Assistant Principals, ELA Teachers, Staff and students Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal , Assistant Principals,Teachers daily Staff and students Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal , Assistant Principals, Teachers, monthly Provide workshops for parents that will inform them of the assessment process and strategies to support their child's goals that are aligned to feedback from teachers. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 monthly Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator,Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  MS582 will engage families and support their understanding of Effective school Leadership promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home through parent outreach on Tuesdays, parent meetings , parent orientation in September, Open houses for parents as well as workshops provided by MS582 Staff and Grand Street Settlement staff held bi-monthly throughout the school year. Additionally, parents that attend the PTA meeting and are on the School Leadership Team will acquire extensive knowledge about our Leadership decisions and strategies. We also send out monthly newsletters and have our websites for parents to keep our parents informed. School leaders and Parent Coordinator will oversee implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Brooklyn North Professional Development Calendar days for teachers and administration, ELA teachers, Assistant Principal, Principal, ELA Lead teacher , Afterschool teacher per session, supervisor per session. Data/Inquiry/Assessment Team will be paid per session and meet 8 times during the year. After School Program for Instruction (2 days a week, 2.5 hrs per day; for 30 weeks) taught by approximately 3 teachers, funded through Magnet and St.Nick's Alliance Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Performance series (Local MOSL) benchmark data will be used to monitor student progress toward our goal of 80% of our students achieving a 5% increase on the MOSL. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Performance Series MOSL assessment results in February will be used to assess progress to compare the growth from the October MOSL results. . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MS582 recognizes the importance of parental involvement. This has been an area that is in need of improvement. We usually have very few attendees at PTA meetings and this year , one of our goals is to encourage parents to be involved in their child's education and attend school functions. During our last Quality Review , we received 2 well developed ratings for engaging , rigorous curricula and establishing a culture of learning with high expectations. During our Central Led Review , 4 out of the 5 Quality Review indicators were rated as areas of celebration for our school. In 2016, MS582 became a recipient of the Magnet Grant for technology, multimedia and urban planning. This grant has led to the establishment of more than 14 partnerships with CBO'S , as well as residencies . Our CBO partners work alongside our teachers to integrate the magnet themes into daily instruction through PBL tasks and projects. Additionally, our partnership with St. Nick's Alliance has afforded us the opportunity to provide our students with academic and extra currricular activities such as an ELA and Math Intervention program, Hip-hop Dance , Cooking Club , Coding, soccer and a basketball program that will run from September 2018 until June 2019 every Monday through Friday from 2:20-5:00pm. In addition, the Magnet Grant includes a component for Parent Workshops on the Common Core, the Instructional Shifts, and the NYS Assessments. We are hoping to get many parents to participate in these 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  informative workshops. We are also offering parents an ESL class on Saturdays to learn English.In addition, we are part of the School Success Initiative to provide a Saturday GED program for parents and an arts program for students featuring Drama (acting/theater). Additionally, NYCares in cooperation with Ernst and Young, provide 3 annual full day lessons through “Young Achievers” to all of our students with a focus on College and Career Readiness through finance and Logos’ and parents are invited to participate as well.  MS582 ia a leader in Me school that focuses on a culture of high expectations,self esteem building, positive reinforcement and a positive building tone to promote appropriate behavior that is supported by our advisory program. There are monthly activities where all members of the 582 community are invited to celebrate positive behavior, and academic achievements including honor roll assemblies, class work and homework and preparedness for class. Parents are invited to all school functions through messenger phone system, and backpacked letters home in their native language. MS 582 focuses on high expectations for students in all academic areas. To celebrate these achievements we host awards assemblies focusing on academic success, including attendance and honor roll so that parents can celebrate their child's academic achievements and to create and encourage a communal environment. Hallway displays and bulletin boards reflect the importance of academic achievement and include effective feedback from teachers Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in focused activities to increase positive relationships with students’ families and encourage parent involvement as measured by a 5% increase in parent attendance at school events and the Parent Coordinator Activity report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will foster a collaborative exchange of information flow between parents and teachers by keeping them informed of their child’s progress and helping them to understand assessments through parent workshops and phone calls during parent engagement Tuesdays. Staff will write and/or call families before the school year starts and will participate in Open House throughout the year every Thursday to welcome families. Develop programs to inform and train parents how to utilize online tools such as Jupiter to monitor their child’s progress and assignments. PTA meetings that include Student of the month Assemblies, Family curriculum night, Multicultural Day, School Tours, and the Fall festival will be implemented to celebrate , inform and engage parents in an effort to include them more fully into their child's daily academic life. Utilize bi-lingual staff in further developing communication strategies with families where English is not the spoken language at home. Develop staff skills to support families to meet their learning goals. Foster a learning environment that supports social-emotional learning and includes parents in decision making processes. . Work together to help children overcome behavioral challenges. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers and parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal , Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator All teachers, and parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Recruitment team, Teachers, Principal , Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator All staff, Parents and Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Principal , Assistant Principals, SLT, Staff, Parents Sept.2018-June 2019 Grand Street Settlement, Principal, Teachers, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator , If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. St. Nick's Alliance,Grand Street settlement, NY Cares , Leader in Me, our Magnet CBO'S, Magnet CBO'S, UFT Community Schools and our Recruitment Team., Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  SLT meetings, PTA meetings, Schoolwide events, Recruitment Team, Jupiter , Materials for Workshops for parents, Title 3 funds, Title 1 funds. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The family engagement team and school leadership team will work together to evaluate the overall parent engagement program in February 2019 and offer suggestions for improvement.A digital record and signature logs will be kept of parent participation for all school events and fundraisers and compared to prior year’s participation to measure growth. Attendance at this year's Parent meetings will be compared to the attendance at last year's meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff will use family contact logs to document all communication with families. The communication will be compared with last school year's data. Families will be surveyed at the beginning and the end of the year. The parent coordinator will document parent communication and maintain parent attendance data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) NYS ELA test scores from prior year indicating Level 1 and/or 2, Instructional Reports, Data fromAchieveNow,DRP,MOSLPerformance Series results, Teacher Referral, DRPdata below 45% and below grade level Lexile Mathematics NYS MATH test scores from prior year indicating Level 1 and/or 2, MOSLPerformance Series results, teacher referral Science Teacher referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) PBLSkill Based lessons Reciprocal Teaching Literature Circles TC Writing cycle Peer assessment PBL Real World Problem Solving Skill Based lessons Reciprocal Teaching Literature Circles Math Writing cycle Peer assessment PBL Skill Based lessons Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group One –to-one tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day Lunch time Peer Mediation Afterschool Small Group One –to-one tutoring Peer Mediation During school day Lunch time Afterschool Program Small Group During school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Social Studies Teacher referral Teacher referral, parent request, Admin request At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) One –to-one tutoring Peer Mediation Lunch time Afterschool Program Small Group One –to-one tutoring Peer Mediation During school day Lunch time Afterschool program Small Group One –to-one tutoring Peer Mediation During school day Lunch time Afterschool Program Reciprocal Teaching Literature Circles TC Argument Writing cycle Peer assessment PBL Skill Based lessons Reciprocal Teaching Literature Circles TC Argument Writing cycle Peer assessment Suicide Prevention Bullying Prevention Respect For All Initiative Workshops Peer Mediation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We offer in house breakfast, lunch and dinner. We provide school supplies, uniforms, Metro cards, At risk counseling , mental health and any other specific needs are addressed on an individual basis. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment To recruit teachers, 14K582 engages in the following: ● New teacher fairs ● Hiring fairs ● Recommendations from highly qualified teachers ● A thorough Level 3 interview process Retention To support teacher retention, 14K582 engages teachers in the following: ● High Quality PD including CFN lab sites and coaching cycles ● Emphasis on their continued professional learning and development through teacher effectiveness/ Danielson Framework for Teaching ● Distributive decision-making that encourages staff to take on more leadership responsibilities, such as teams and lead teacher positions. Assignments Teachers are assigned within their license areas, each April, teachers complete a preference sheet and identify grade and, if applicable ICT partner choice. Additionally, teachers meet one on one with administration to discuss assignment in relation to teacher goals, strengths and needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Support ● Grade & Team/Department meetings ● Mentoring by veteran teachers ● Teacher Effectiveness through Learning Walks ● Lab-Sites for model classroom environments and instructional practices ● Coaching support by administration, lead teachers and other teacher colleagues. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Brooklyn North Instructional leads provide high quality PD for School Leaders , the Superintendent conducts Principal and AP Conferences each month to provide high quality PDfor School Leaders. Monday afternoon Professional Learning Community meeting sessions are planned based on prior year’s teacher ratings in each domain, feedback given to teachers in observation reports and student achievement data. The Professional Development Plan is developed as a working draft before the school year begins. Revisions are made to the plan as needed throughout the year based on targeted teacher need and teacher surveys , as well as student outcomes on PBA’S,baseline assessments, benchmark assessments, lesson plans, observations, TIP plans, and targeted goals. Teachers receive professional development in lesson planning, utilizing a variety of instructional strategies, targeting the needs of all students, purposeful grouping for instruction, differentiating instruction, developing curricula, formative and summative assessment , classroom management, supporting students social and emoional well being, ELL Instruction, Literacy Leadership, and supporting the instructional core, as well as many other areas of curriculum and instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Principal's cabinet members consist of Lead teachers , Administration and a teacher representing each subject , that meets weekly on Monday morning to discuss upcoming events, professional development , assessments and policy issues, where decisions are made ny the cabinet as a whole. Our Magnet Instructional team consists of teachers and administration that meet weekly to discuss, develop, and revise Magnet curriculum and unit projects and integrate Urban Planning concepts into all subject areas. Decisions are made by the team as a whole with all members providing input as well as partaking in culturally diverse courageous conversations around inclusion , diversity and high quality instruction. Teachers work in teams and with School Leadership to engage in LASW protocols in order to assess student work and develop implications for instructional planning. Teachers create assessments that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards curricula based on the objectives and goals for the unit. Common assessment analysis’ drives instructional adjustments across each grade and subject areas. Formative assessments in the form of checks for understanding, exit slips, conferring notes, students responses, and student self assessment lead to effective lesson adjustments. Rubrics are used to evaluate Project Based Assessments and develop effective feedback to provide students with next steps. Teachers choose their MOSL Assesment in the beginning of each school year. Teacher teams focus on common assessment analysis that leads to implications for content decisions and instruction. Teachers use assessment results to inform their instruction and create purposeful grouping for instruction . School Leadership, along with Lead Teachers and classroom teachers provide professional development to all staff on assessment strategies for daily instruction , as well as how to use assessment data to drive instruction. The school and inquiry teams across all content areas track student progress through formative and summative assessments such as MOSLS and PBA tasks. Teacher teams utilize a “Looking at Student Work” protocol, and review student notebooks, common assessments and portfolios. They analyze differentiated activities reflected in lesson plans, flexible grouping for instruction, multiple points of entry, conferring notes, and exit slips for effectiveness. Student work has evidence of student self-assessment as well as teacher evaluation and effective feedback based on rubrics. Teams work to develop and revise future lesson plans based on student outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 270,003.00 n/a n/a 0 0 0 1,634,547.00 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a x Column B Section Reference(s) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. MS582-The Upper Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students MS582-The Upper Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) MS582-The Upper Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community School strategy is integrated into academic instruction at the school in many ways. The most direct includes having two tutors push into the classrooms. Having an additional person in the classroom helps to manage behavior and make sure every student who needs support is supported even if teacher is working with another student(s). The tutor is also available during lunch and afterschool for individual or small group tutoring. We support classroom learning with tutoring and supplemental programming to help students begin planning for high school and beyond. Our tutors worked with 13 different classes every week and held small group tutoring 2-3x a week. Through family engagement we work on promoting events such as: Family Day, the Community School Forum and Parent-Teacher Conferences. During these events, we work with other community based organizations to bring in resources and information to families since they are already attending these events. In the 17-18 School Year, we supported Parent Workshops which focus on linking the new magnet curriculum to learning at home with workshops focusing on our new Hydroponics Lab and Visual Arts Lab. Through these efforts, parents were able to experience what their students were learning in the classroom. Our outreach and communication efforts to families include: our Remind school messenger, parent emails, backpacking home flyers and information, social media, school website, school marquee, posters, and phone banking. Our work with the ELL population has increased due to individual meetings with the Program Coordinator, ESL teacher, ICT teacher and families. This has allowed us to get to know families and their academic expectations and inspirations for their child(ren). For many parents, this was their first time having a meeting at the school. In the 17-18 School Year, we held 61 one on one sessions with families. Additionally, these sessions have helped us connect families to our other case management services. We screened families for Single STOP benefits such as: SNAP, Health Insurance, Cash Assistance and connections to employment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  agencies. We connected families to adult education classes and shared opportunities for students such as the Summer Youth Employment Program, afterschool programs and summer English programs. Through our mental health services, a dental clinic, and vision services, we improve students’ basic health and well-being. 95% of students were tested and 16% (42 Students) received free glasses during the 17-18 School Year. 33 students received 1:1 individual counseling for the year and 462 counseling sessions were held in total. 132 crisis management sessions were reported and 12 students received group counseling all year. 318 students have visited our dental clinic. Other mental health services include: dog therapy, support with peer mediation, teacher professional development and student skill building trips and workshops. . The tutors push-in during the lessons and assist the students throughout the course of the day, especially the ELL population. This has had a positive impact on our students in that they look forward to working with the tutors, they have shown academic growth, and has helped them feel more confident in participating in the classroom. The organization also helps collect testing data and attendance data which then is turn-keyed to the administration and used for developing an individualized service plan, which helps us to meet the needs of our students. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have a 1% increase in attendance as evidenced by the New Visions Data Sorter. We will hold bi-weekly attendance meetings and student support meetings with school attendance team to review attendance trends and support interventions for students who are chronically absent. By June 2019, we will have an increase in parent involvement activities as evidenced by attendance sheets/registrations and agendas for events, and parent workshops. We will utilize the Community Resource Room, and help to support the showcase of student achievement through celebrations and recognitions. By June 2019, we will have an increase in the number of partnerships developed with businesses, and community-based organizations. By June 2019, we will have an increase in utilization rates of mental health services and the mental health of students, parents, teachers and community members. The CBO will host a community school forum for both families and school staff to participate in together that focus on the importance of education and the success of the community school. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our goal with attendance supports the academic goals for students because students who attend school every day would be able to follow along with curriculum resulting in higher academic performance and test results. Better attendance leads to better student success. Our goals with Family Engagement help increase parent engagement because parents who are informed and empowered, empower their children. Our mental health goals affect how our school community thinks, feels and how they learn. Health services such as dental and vision are attributes that can affect the ability to learn and can be barriers to student achievement. Our work around building character, leadership, critical thinking, and decision making are just as important as academics. Finally, our supports of academic life include helping students learning through multiple modes, and having higher expectations for one’s future lead to a better future. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Success Mentors By June 2019, Success Mentors will form a relationship with mentee as a student intervention. A plan will then be created alongside student and mentor. They will develop 5 goals in which students will complete at least 3/5 goals. By June 2019, all students who are chronically absent will have attendance interventions included in the New Visions Data Sorter. By June 2019, 30 students deemed at risk will begin individual counseling once a week with social work team. All students identified will begin with a intake evaluation and will have signed consent forms. By June 2019, 80% of students in the small group counseling will meet weekly with social work team. CBO Partnership Grand Street Settlement Chronically and Severely Chronically Absent Students Grand Street Settlement Chronically Absent Students Attendance Interventions Grand Street Settlement At Risk Students based on attendance/grades and behavior Individual Counseling Grand Street Settlement At Risk Students based on attendance/grades and behavior Small Group Counseling Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  The NYC Department of Education has renewed MS 582’s and Grand Street Settlement’s community school contract for one period of three years and will commence on July 1st, 2018 until June 30, 2021. The Community Schools grant helps support the implementation of the Community School model and the following services: attendance, mental health, parent/family engagement, academic support, medical and community collaboration and programs. The Office of Community Schools, Office of School Mental Health and Grand Street Settlement provide flexible scheduling, opportunities for professional development, human resources and support with programming. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The Community School has hired a Community School Director who has been at the school for a two full years and understands the needs of the school community. During the summer, the Community School Director will initiate a follow up needs assessment and receive feedback from community stakeholders to see if any change needs to happen. The Community School Director has and will continue organizing and leading the Community School Team which comprises of administration, teachers, parents, students and community partners. This team has discussed improvements which have been updated in the 17-18 Community School Budget. When coordinating activities, the Community School Director will meet with Assistant Principal(s) as needed to organize events, implement strategies and communicate about upcoming needs. The Community School CBO members will work out of Room 409 and will have access to a social work room to be used for individual counseling and small group counseling sessions. The Community School Director has and will participate in School Leadership Team Meetings, support attendance meetings and initiate collaborative planning sessions for events such as the Community School Forum. As a community school we use a variety of systems to personalize the needs of all students. Attendance strategies are individualized and interventions are designed with students and families in mind. During attendance team meetings, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  we will look at students who might need additional interventions and design interventions with all stakeholders to inform a student intervention plan. Other attendance interventions services can include daily pick-ups, family meetings, home visits and individual/group counseling. Mental health is also individualized based on student needs. If student needs outside referrals, social work team learns referral process and communicates with family to approve outside services. Mental health team is also available to manage crisis and support with peer mediation. Through our Single Stop program, families are case managed and services are personalized based on need. Our case manager also follows up with families with resources and information about adult education, immigration services and employment programs. During the 17-18 School Year we implemented 1:1 ELL family meetings and will continue going into the next school year. Through meetings with school administration and school staff we will be able to collaborate on making sure instruction is seamless with school day programming. In addition, our tutors will participate in grade and subject meetings to discuss curriculum and test results. Our tutors will be able to work during the school day during in class push in as well as during lunch and after school programming. To support strong family/school/community ties, we will work with the school’s parent coordinator to find out the interests and needs of parents and families; make them feel welcomed and create opportunities for parents to actively participate in school activities and student success. We will maintain close contact with our families through the use of the Remind application which has grown to be the main form of contact with families this past school year. Through outreach with our families, we will communicate events such as Tuesday Family Engagement Day where parents can speak to the teachers and administration to advocate for their students. In addition, these events will allow teachers to be able to reach out to families when praising and giving positive comments about students thus empowering students and families. Our program coordinator and social worker will work to conduct home visits to get to know families on a deeper level and to support families in obtaining any assistance such as: SNAP, Health Insurance and other benefits. Through a connection with our sister Grand Street Settlement community centers, day care centers, afterschool programs and senior programs we will be able to share information and opportunities to get involved in advocacy, health and wellness. We are committed to inviting students to visit off-site programs enabling students to learn more about college, STEM, and providing the opportunity for the students to join the various Grand Street community center afterschool programs, summer camps, and leadership summits. Parents and families will be invited to collaborate with other stakeholders in the Community School Team to develop their leadership potential along with the PTA and SLT teams. The Community Resource Room 409 will be a welcoming and informative environment where families and the community can come and receive support to meet needs. Resources include: computers, printer, copier/scanner and internet will be available for use. Communication will increase through the use of monthly newsletters, family engagement activities, and through the use of parent volunteers. Our Community School Forum will take place at the end of the year and include engaging discussion tables where stakeholders will be able to give feedback and ideas on school vision for following year. During attendance meetings we case manage students with the support of our guidance counselor, program coordinator, assistant principal, parent coordinator and teachers. We use the new visions data sorter to add interventions and analyze attendance trends and data. This data is also discussed and given to teachers. Community School Director and Assistant Principal will meet as needed to discuss programming, challenges, upcoming events, new staff, scheduling and community school work plan. Follow up will be communicated via email. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Our Community School Team will consist of: CSD Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, PTA President, Teachers, Student Council President, Community Members and CBO Staff. Community School Team Meetings will be organized by CSD including organizing agenda, creating sign in sheets, sending out reminders and facilitation. We will use data from the data sorter, school calendar, memos and our event attendance records to share and engage with the Community School Team. All members will have the opportunity to contribute and/or present as part of the agenda. We will recruit members through outreach and orientations in the beginning of the school year. During our Attendance Team Meetings we will go in depth to intervene with at risk and chronically absent students. We will go through the data sorter, discuss each student and assign next steps to an attendance team member. Universal strategies will be shared at Community School Team Meetings, SLT Meetings and school outreach mechanisms. Grand Street staff will focus on the majority of the strategies by collaborating with school administration and school staff. We are working with a number of community based organizations to provide extra support with parent and family engagement, referrals/linkages and resources. We also work with Ramapo for Children to provide mental health support with student leadership retreats and teacher coaching. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. To implement mental health strategies we utilize our new counseling room where students and social workers can discuss in private. We will need students schedules to schedule sessions and to communicate with teachers of weekly sessions. To implement dental program, dental room needs to be accessible and supplied with electricity, water and dental equipment. To implement vision program, two rooms are needed in order for all students to be seen. To support attendance strategies, ATS program is needed to print records for school staff and to update contact information. Frequent check ins with assistant principal is needed to work on strategies and scheduling of events and outreach. Rooms will be needed for any new community school programming. Communication to and from the school psychologists, social workers, and guidance counselor is needed to collaborate on mental health interventions for students needing extra services. Space is needed for parent/family engagement events which can include parent room, cafeteria and play yard. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Implementation will begin at start of the 2018-2019 school year and end at the end of the school year with preparation in the summer months. Community School Team will meet once a month on the first Friday of every month and attendance team meetings will be every other Tuesday. Exact time is dependent on participants of each team. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Data including NYSESLAT, classroom work, portfolios, student reading levels, and periodic assessments indicate that our ENL students need further instruction in reading and writing and opportunities to develop oral language to attain English proficiency and meet state academic achievement standards. Our program takes place on Saturdays starting December through April for 3 hours. There will be approximately 15-20 ENL students from grades 6, 7 & 8 participating in the program. The students will be taught in English by a certified ENL teacher. The program will focus on developing oral language, vocabulary, reading and writing. Instruction will be scaffold and modified in order to meet the needs of each student. In order to do so, the ENL teacher will be supplied with workbooks that will help ENL students increase knowledge of vocabulary and English grammar. The resources that will be used are: trade books across all subjects, Comprehension Skills-Inference , Comprehension Skills-Author's Purpose, Comprehension Skills-Main Idea, Comprehension Skills: Sequence, The Oxford Picture Dictionary for Kids, chapter books and novels across Fountas and Pinnell levels A-Z. In addition, use of computers and software, such as Rosetta Stone, to help with fluency of second language learning. Students will be grouped by their levels; the students that will be participating are of Transitioning level and could benefit from the additional instruction in preparation for standardized testing and they are spread out through 6th, 7th, and 8th grade. The language of Instruction will be primarily in English, with the support of Spanish. The ENL teacher will be responsible for attendance and supplying parents information in their language of choice. The program will be supervised by the school assistant principal, Ms. Capuano. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school holds weekly content area department meetings where the content teachers, administrators, and the ENL teacher discuss new research, innovative and insightful approaches that may be used to meet specific needs of ENL students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part C: Professional Development Following is a list of dates and topics for our in house professional development sessions. This component will be at no cost to the program. Professional development sessions will be provided by an administrator and the ESL teacher. Attendance will be taken and sheets and agendas with all materials will be maintained on file and digitally. -Sept 2018 Understanding the Individual Needs of your ENL Students (in house) -Oct 2018 Supporting ENL Students during ELA (in house) -Nov 2018 Strategies to Help ELL students succeed (in house) -Dec 2018 Small Group Reading Instruction for ELL students (in house) -Jan. 2019 Nuts and Bolts:Critical ELL Components for Compliance -Oct. 2018-June 2018 ELL Coordinator Working Group -Oct. 2018-April 2018 Sole ELL Provider Working Group -Jan 2019 Preparing your ENL Students for the NYS ELA & Math assessments (in house) -Feb 2019 Supporting the Parents of your ENL Students(in house) -March 2019 Adapting Writing Lessons for ENL Students(in house) -March 2019 Implementing modifications for ELL students within the classroom(in house) -April 2019 Using Bilingual Books and Dictionaries Effectively with ELL Students(in house) - May 2019 Internet/ Effective Use with the ELL Student(in house) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The first two parent orientation days, where parents are given information regarding their rights , available programs and other issues of relevance to ENL education, and where they are encouraged to express their concerns and ask any questions they wish to are scheduled at MS 582 on Sept 12 and Sept 14, 2018. Our parents are invited to collaborate with their children with their daily studies. We also offer parents workshops to support parental efforts to assist and engage with their children's education. These are provided by our ENL teacher and our parent coordinator, both of whom are bilingual. Our tentative topics and schedule for this school year are as follows: -Supporting First language Literacy as a Bridge to English (Oct 2018) -Helping your Child with Reading ( Dec 2018) -Practicing Writing in English ( Feb 2019) -Math and English ( April 2019) -Parent and Child Summer Reading and Writing Projects (Jun 2019) In addition, for the last year, the ENL teacher has been collaborating with the community based organization, Grand Street Settlement, to help create a school-family liaison. The teacher and the social workers of Grand Street Settlement, have met with the parents of our ELL students to discuss what are some of the challenges they face in today's society, on a daily basis, as immigrants living in the New York City. Together, they are reaching out to families, providing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities them with useful information regarding services that can help them lead a better quality of life and help them become an active part of our community and better sustain their children in their educational growth. Such services are: access to temporary financial assistance, public health care, and free adult English classes. These meetings will continue to take place during the present school year, in the Fall and Spring semesters. In addition, A Multicultural Evening event is held in our school with the participation of our staff members and Grand Street Settlement. On this occasion, family members of our students are invited to prepare and share a traditional dish for their country. The school staff and ENL teacher is responsible for sending out literature regarding this event in their language of choice. Events such as this are also posted on the school website and other social media. During Parent-Teacher Conferences, staff members, such as the ENL teacher and counselors from Grand Street Settlement, are available to aid parents and teachers in the event that translation is necessary. We also have available to us a translating service, such as The Big Word, from which expert translators can be requested for important school events such as Parent-Teacher Conferences , and I.E.P. meetings . Assistant Principal, Ms. Capuano, and the ENL teacher will maintain and and log literature used for these events held in our school, along with sign-in sheets of the names of the families that attend. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a Other TOTAL n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name The Magnet School for Urban Planning, Te Borough Brooklyn School Number 582 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal B. Walsh Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area M. Buono/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area A.Gjikola / Special Education Related-Service Provider Grieco-Speech Superintendent Winnicki Assistant Principal D. Capuano Coach type here School Counselor E. Unger Parent Evelyn Lopez Parent Coordinator B. Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 280 Total number of ELLs 36 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.86% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 00 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the Pearson periodic assessment series for ELL students. The assessment is administered twice per year. Baseline and benchmark results are analyzed in October and February in order to plan for instruction based on Item Skills Analysis. We use a variety of assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELL's including Fountas and Pinnel and running records. This data provides us with insights relevant to how much literacy a student has achieved. This information is then used to target areas of deficiency for that student. Next, steps are planned based on the data yielded from these assessment tools. Areas of weakness are addressed through targeted strategy lesson based on the data, as well as through use of technology and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  learning centers. After reviewing the results of the Fountas and Pinnel, it is determined what targeted and focused early literacy instruction would be valuable for our ELL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ESL teacher creates a targeted plan for each ENL student that includes scaffolded mini lessons, tiered vocabulary, phonemic awareness and small group reading lessons with the general education and special education teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our Program for Ell's in a variety of ways. We do ongoing assessment and monitoring of content area understanding and progress in the classroom. Additionally, a valuable indicator of the success of our program is to analyze how long it takes for ELL's to go from one level to the upper one and how long it takes for our Ell's to test out of ESL and into fully monolingual English settings. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ESL teacher will administer Wilson program , small group instruction , reading and skill based tutoring sessions throughout the week. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For Ells who score below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school determines additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration the evidence such as the following:numbers of years of instruction in ESL, English and home language literacy, content area and socio-emotional support for SIFE students, English and home language literacy need of long term ELLs, reults of the NYSESLAT, ESL teacher recommendation, content area teacher recommendation, parent or guardian request, sample of student work in English and if possible in the home language, bilingual educatinal evaluaation , if the student has or is suspected of having a disability. These support services are aligned to any other intervention services already being provided to all students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across all grades 6-8 are as follows: Students taking the NYSITELL fall in the Beginner/Entering Level. The data also reveals that regardless of proficiency level our ENL students have the most difficulty with reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The administration, Lead teachers ,PCT's and inquiry teams will turnkey the informatiion at Monday PLC's and during team meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped according to their level of English acquisition. The Entering(Beginning) students are given 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes or 8 periods. 1unit of study or 4 periods is ENL and the additional unit is Integrated ENL/ELA. The Emerging students (Low Intermediate) are given 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes or 8 periods. They receive 1 unit or 4 periods in ENL, 1 unit of study or 4 periods of Integrated ENL/ELA .The Transitioning (Intermediate) are given 1 unit of study per week or 180 minutes or 4 periods from which 2 periods or .5 units of study are Integrated ENL/ELA and 2 periods or.5 unit of study are ENL. The Expanding (Advanced) are given 1 unit of study per weekor 180 minutes or 4 periods. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  All 4 periods are in other Content Area. The Commanding (Proficient) continue to receive Integrated ENL in other content area services for an additional two years. The STAND ALONE ENL services are provided by our K-12 Certified TESOL Teacher, the ENL/ELA Integrated services are taught by the TESOL certified teacher and a K-6 certified elementary school teacher or a 7-8 certified content area teacher (ELA, Math, Scienceor Social Studies). Students provided with ENL services are grouped heterogeneously and travel to the ENL classroom, for students receiving Integrated services-ENL/ELA or other content areas- the ENL teacher will travel to their class. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are grouped according to their level of English acquisition. The Entering(Beginning) students are given 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes or 8 periods. 1unit of study or 4 periods is ENL and the additional unit is Integrated ENL/ELA. The Emerging students (Low Intermediate) are given 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes or 8 periods. They receive 1 unit or 4 periods in ENL, 1 unit of study or 4 periods of Integrated ENL/ELA .The Transitioning (Intermediate) are given 1 unit of study per week or 180 minutes or 4 periods from which 2 periods or .5 units of study are Integrated ENL/ELA and 2 periods or.5 unit of study are ENL. The Expanding (Advanced) are given 1 unit of study per weekor 180 minutes or 4 periods. All 4 periods are in other Content Area. The Commanding (Proficient) continue to receive Integrated ENL in Content area services and support (extra time in tests) for an additional two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The language of instruction is English. We put appropriate scaffold in place to make content comprehensible to ELL's and we differentiate instruction to both enhance understanding and to enrich language development. We use a variety of ENL strategies and methodologies , including TPR, the Natural Approach, and a variety of other instructional approaches depending on the content being taught and the students that are learningit. We use graphic organizers, integrated technology, learning centers, small group instruction ,one on one instructions, and native language peers to make content more comprehensible. We use the ESL component of the Houghton Mifflin Series, the Heinle Picture Dictionary and workbook, the Rosetta Stone Workbook, and Study Guide, Newsela leveled reads and Writing Journals.Our ENL teacher articulates with content area teachers in the specified area. We have aligned our lessons to the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Having only an ESL Program , we evaluate the native language ability of our ELLS by administering The Spanish LanguageAssessment Battery upon entrance to our school. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our instructionalplan for SIFE students includes intensive and focused instruction before, during and after school to address the specific needs of each student. Students are provided with native language libraries and materials to enhance literacy skills in their first language and assist to acquire English language skills.Students are taught phonemic awareness and phonics, develop fluency as well as basic literacy skills.These students receive small group instruction with with appropiate scaffols and differentiated instruction. b. In addition to all of the above newcomers are put into an After School Program where extra time is dedicated to making content and testing strategies understandable. c. Additionally, we analyze the data from all of the test these students receive and attempt to ddetermine the limiting factor impending their passing the NYSESLAT and target these areas for intensive instruction. e. Former ELLs are provided additional support in the classroom, and are provided small group instruction to prepare them for the standardized exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers of ELL and SWD students use a variety of instructional strategies and grade level materials in order to make academic content comprehensible and accesible. They include some of the following: We use differentiated instructional strategies including Tiered Questioning,CALLA, TPR and Natural Approach as well as other when appropriate. IEP's are reviewed to ensure that all mandates are received. The ELL teacherarticulates with SBST and the school psychologist . Delivery of services is tracked through SESIS reports. We haave specific small group targeted instruction that addresses differen learning styles. When apropriate, we use visual as well as auditory and technological assists. Our grade level lmaterials include the Heinle Dictionary and Workbook, bilingual libraries and dictionaries, Rosetta Stone, Access Newcomers, Access Building Literacy through Learning, Language, Literacy and Vocabulary among others. Finally, we use a variety of stategies to meet the diverse needs of our ELLS and SWD students. Our AIS providers use multiple entry points including manipulatives , a variety of instructional strategies for content access and and extensive vocabulary instruction.Our units of study are aligned with the Common Core Standards. Thus, we attempt to focus on the Universal Design for Learning. When there is material that is not adequately been comprehended and synthesized, as reflected by test data and teacher assessments, students are given extended day intensive instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use a variety of pedagogical methods to address the diverse learning styles of our ELL-SWDs. After reviewing their IEPs we determine how best to achieve the goals outlined by planning and collaborating with the Special Education Teachers. As a result,we are able to achieve flexibility in scheduling and determine the best instructional approach and materials to be used with an individual student within the least restrictive environment.A 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our programs are taught in English. After reviewing the data from the ELA exam, the NYS Math and the NYSESLAT, we have found a need for intensive targeted focus in reading and writing. As a result, we have instituted a variety of targeted intervention programs. Some of the targeted intervention programs we offer are Guided Reading, Small Group Instruction based on weakness in a specific skill and Common Core Standard, one on one conference with students, and individual learning plans using Item Skill Analysis 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  data, CCLS, AIS Push-in for individual ELL students. SIFE students, newcomers, and long term ELL's are assigned to the program that best addressess their needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will be expanding our Rosetta Stone Program and using additional ESL Language software as part of the targeted intervention programs described above. In addition to the Wilson Program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our Ells are included in all programs and activities that are available at our school. All notices sent home for parents attention regarding available programs are bilingual. Additionally, our Parent Coordinator reaches out to the community and makes them aware of and explains the programs available to their children. We have Afterschool Literacy and Math programs and an ESL Enrichment program. Ells are involved in all of these. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our instructional materials include Access Newcomers, Access Building LiteracyThrough Learning, Language, Literacy and Vocabulary, Rosetta Language Program, a variety of bilingual books and dictionaries, Reader's Theater for fluency and comprehension, Heinle Picture Dictionaries and Workbooks, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and a host of other language software. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ESL teacher also speaks Spanish. We also support the native language of our ELL's by having bilingual dictionaries, academic glosaries available for their use both at school and home. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All the services and support, as well as the resources that are used to enhance ELL's English Lanaguage development correspond to their ages and grade levels. The required support services and resources are age and grade appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our instructional materials include Access Newcomers, Access Building LiteracyThrough Learning, Language, Literacyand Vocabulary, Rosetta Language Program, a variety of bilingual books and dictionaries, Reader's Theater for fluency and comprehension, Heinle Picture Dictionaries and Workbooks, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and a host of other language software. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We invite parents and students for a before school bilingual ESL orientation and information session. Entrants who come in during the year are similarly provided for. In addition, they are assigned and Englis Language buddy to help ease the transition to a new language. All appropriate supports , including a range of technological supports, are provided for these students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At present we are not offering language electives 18. For schools with dual language programs: In which language(s) is each core content area taught? a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Math and ELA teachers are sent to network cluster training on ELL instruction and then turnkey to all staff members at a weeklly PD Monday staff meeting. MS 582 – Instructional Focus Our instructional focus is to improve the quality of instruction and impact student achievement through the use of daily, ongoing assessment that is used to purposefully plan differentiated groups that target student’s individual needs. Teachers will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  view assessment through an inquiry lens, in order to adjust instructional practices that will ensure engaging rigorous and coherent curricula that is accessible to a variety of learners and aligned to the CCLS. 2017-2018 MS 582 PD Plan* * Professional Development Sessions are Subject to Change as this is a Living Document Important Dates April 5-7 – ELA Assessment April 13-15 – Math Assessment May 25- June 3 – Science Performance (8th Grade) June 1 – Science Written (8th Grade) Cycle 1 – Launching the School Year Sept. 2017 Reviewing of Handbook Principal Brian Walsh All Staff Staff will gain an understanding of the Handbook created for the intention of supporting staff in all aspects of the MS 582 community. October / November 2017 Teaching Reading in the Common Core Classroom Asst. Principal Capuano All Staff will gain an understanding of how to teach reading using the Balanced Literacy Approach. November 2017 Using Assessment to drive instruction Capuano All Staff will learn how to use data to inform their planning and drive instrution December/ January 2018 Teachers College Overview ELA Curriculum Danielle Capuano Staff will gain an understating of the Teachers College Writing curriculum, instructional strategies and multiple entry points for ELL'S, AND SPECIAL NEEDS STUDENTS. February/ March 2016 Preparing for the NYS Assesments Administration /Lead Teacher All staff will gain an understanding of how best to prepare students for upcoming standardized tests. April/ May 2018 Breaking the Barriers- Cultural Competence Magnet Program All Staff This workshop will introduce the concept of cultural competence while challenging participants to recognize its impact on teaching and student performance This session will explore the significance of cultural competence in adhering to the mandates of education initiatives like the Common Core State Standards and the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching. Participants will examine a conceptual framework for cultural competence, current research and engage in small group discussions. June 2018 --June Planning revising curriculum maps and Backwards Planning for September . The ESL teacher attends Professional Devlopment organized by the DOE. Additionally, the ESL teacher receives professional development on lesson design, differentiation, and strategies for ESL students to gain entry into the learning, formative and summative assessment , and using data to drive your instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To assist Ells as they transition from middle school to high school, key personnel from the designated school come to speak to our students regarding shool policy, curriculum and extra curricular activities. In addition, they are given a tour of the school building , as well as brochures, and an open house for students and their parents. Guidance Counselor meets with ESL teacher to discuss ELL Students and counselor meets with individual students to support students in the transition to middle school from elementary. School provides profesional development to all teachers and administrators, 15% of it specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners and is dedicated to language acquisition, which includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. For bilingual and ENL teachers, a minimun of 50% of their required Professional Development is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  content area of instruction, which includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the initial parent orientations, parent-teacher conferences,the parent coordinator works with the multilingual ESL teacher- to conduct individual meetings in the parent's language or mode of communication to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress , English language proficiency assessment results, and their child's language development needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ell Parent involvement at MS 582 includes parent workshops and community events held monthly for our entire school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brian Walsh, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 582 School DBN: 14K582 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) BWalsh D Capuano B Rodriguez A. Vukan Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Lopez Parent M Buono/ Special Education Teacher/Subject Area A.Gjikola/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Unger Winnicki n/a n/a n/a n/a Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/17/17 6/17/17 6/17/17 6/17/17 1/1/17 6/17/17 6/17/17 n/a n/a 6/17/17 6/17/17 n/a /n/a n/a 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: K582 School Name: ms582 Superintendent: A.Winniki The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At MS 582, in 6th Grade , there are 7 ELL students , in 7th Grade , there are 12 ELL students,and in 8th grade there are 9 students. Overall for the 2015-2016 school year , we have 28 ELL students. Long Term ELLs are given extra AIS Services and their work is assessed to see what specific interventions are needed. Our LAP committee consists of the following staff members: Principal , Brian Walsh,Assistant Principal Danielle Capuano Parent Coordinator, Bibiana Rodriguez, ESL Teacher, Maria Tejada, PTA President, Evelyn Rivera, SETSS Mrs.Duplan, and the Guidance Counselor, Mr. Unger. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  All parents/guardians of newly enrolled students fill out a Home Language Survey when enrolling their child. This form is maintained as part of the student’s record. If the parent/guardian indicates on the HLIS that they would like to receive information from the school in their home language, forms being sent home are translated either in written form or orally to the parent/guardian. Information from teachers is translated to parents by staff members who speak the home language. The DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized if a parent/guardian should request these services. This was indicated on the HLIS as well as confirmed orally by a pedagogue who speaks the parents' home language. The intake process for ENL students that are new to the country is implemented using the Part CR \ \ 154 guidelines. During weekly parent orientations, the parents can also provide requests for language preference and they document their language preference on the emergency contact cards. Parent surveys are distributed in Spanish and English. The ATS Report of Preferred Languages is updated regularly in order to maintain accurate information on parent language choices ( RAPO ATS Report). Parent Blue Cards are also updated regularly to keep parent language choices current. Parent surveys are given out by the parent coordinator in order to maintain accurate data on parent language choices. Teachers also send home surveys by backpack or during parent conferences in order to collect parent data by class/grade. A report is generated using a variety of data sets in order to regularly update the languages that parents speak by class and/or grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The primary language spoken by each parent is determined by our school through the use of the Home Language Identification Survey, and a questionnaire sent to the home in Spanish and English requesting the same information. The results are tallied and help us determine what translation and interpretation sevices are needed. All 245 homes of our students were surveyed; of these 25 % of our parents speak Spanish, with the balance speaking English as their primary language. We have communicated this information and provided translation and interpretations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  services to our school community through our newsletter. Approximately seventy five- percent of the school’s population reports English as the primary language. The remaining twenty five pecent speak Spanish. The school’s demographic is made available on the school’s official DOE website and is periodically reported in our school’s newsletter. Teachers whose parents have elected to receive information in their home language have had this information communicated to them by the ENL teacher/coordinator. This was indicated on the HLIS. All other language needs are met through the utilization of the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families We provide written translation services to meet the needs identified by the parents above, by in house fully bilingual staff as well as contractors as necessary. We have provided translated Bill of How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Parents Rights and Responsibilities to our parents. We have forms available in the languages that we need, Spanish, and English, as well as appropriate signage in our school. The procedure followed to provide written translation in a timely manner is as follows: all known school documents and notices are translated in September so that they are readily available while all other are done on an as needed basis and distributed concurrently with monolingual English versions. This includes translations of monthly newsletters, Academic Vocabularies glossaries for Math and ELA for parental use with their children and all Health notices.Documents which are distributed to parents/guardians and require translations are: annual handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements, ELL parent orientation information letters, NYSESLAT testing notification and calendar, other NYS testing dates, curriculum overview, ELL entitlement and non-entitlement letters, as well as letters from the school leadership. Curriculum information is sent at the beginning of the school year. Testing dates and calendars are provided as soon as they become available in order to allow parent/guardians to prepare themselves as well as their children for upcoming events. Parent's Bill of Rights are distributed as they become available to the school. School annoucements, after school program information, general overview of student curriculum and letters from school leadership is translated in order to keep all parents aware and engaged on all school matters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? MS582 holds four parent conferences throughout the school year. The first, in September, we hold our annual Open House , which introduces parents to their child's new grade,teachers and and provides curriculum information. The next three, held in November, March and June are focused on student progress and grades. The ESL teacher holds a parent orientation for any newly enrolled ELL parent/guradian as well as separate meetings for individual ELL parent/guardians throughout the year. Teachers communicate with parents throughout the year in order to address questions/concerns ad well as any possible issues in or outside of the classroom. If necessary, the guidance counselor will also be present during such meetings. In addition to these meetings, a designated one to one parent conference will take place annually in order to provide updates on student progress as mandated by CR Part 154. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) MS 582 has a multilingual welcome poster hanging in the main entrance to the school building so that everyone that enters the building is aware of language assistance services. Language I.D. guides are kept in at the security office as well as the main office. Information for parents on the N.Y.C.D.O. E.'s translation and interpretation services are available in 10 languages, and is kept at the security desk and main office. Parents' Bill of Rights are sent to the school is a variety of languages and they are distributed upon arrival to all parents who have indicated a preferred language other than English. MS582l staff are aware of language assistance services provided by the school by using data ( ATS Reports, Blue Cards and Surveys), updated roster of bilingual staff and The Translation and Interpretation Unit Services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning of the year which gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The ENL teacher also meets individually with all parents/guardians of ELLs and can then also ascertain the needs and concerns that they may have. After such meetings,the ENL teacher confers with the parent coordinator and/or the classroom teachers in order to discuss the needs of the parents/guardians and students. In order to gather feedback from parents, we are creating a focus group of multilingual and multicultural parents to discuss their needs and the needs of their children. We can obtain information to inform our practices in order to improve the quality and availability of services we provide to parents and students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83 
