2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K588 School Name: MIDDLE SCHOOL FOR ART AND PHILOSOPHY Principal: CHRISTOPHER PADMORE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Middle School for Art and Philosophy 18K588 School Number (DBN): 331800010588 6-8 1084 Lenox Road Brooklyn, NY 11212 718.342.7563 Phone Number: 718.342.8131 Fax: Christopher Padmore cpadmore3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Christopher Padmore Dexter Braithwaite Miriam Sylla Lorainne Swearing and Dexter Braithwaite (co-chairs) n/a -NA -NA Ashlyn King District Information Geographical District: 18 Beverly A. Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 E. 95 th Street Brooklyn NY 11236 Superintendent’s Office Address: bwilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6005 Phone Number: 718-3428131 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn South Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director: 415 89th Street Brooklyn, NY Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 759-4862 (718) 290-3677 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Christopher Padmore Dexter Braithwaite Miriam Sylla Kevin Harrison Tiffany Mooney - - Ashlyn King Danielle Lamb Loraine Swearing Jessica Fischer-Smith Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Jacqueline Francis - - - - - - Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school's Mission: At the Middle School for Art and Philosophy we provide a safe, developmentally appropriate and academically rigorous learning experience in order to develop a community of lifelong learners, productive citizens, and critical thinkers who apply what they learn throughout their lives. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Middle School for Art and Philosophy is a middle school on the border of the East Flatbush and Brownsville sections of Brooklyn. The school currently serves 176 students in grades 6-8. The vast majority of students (traditionally over 80%) fall below the poverty line thus qualifying the school for Title I assistance. Approximately 86% of the students are Black and 8% are Hispanic, the rest being divided between other sub-groups. Approximately 30% of students receive IEP services while 7% are labeled English Language Learners. The school services a large number of transient students as well as those housed in homeless shelters. In addition, the school receives students from the following districts 18, 19 and 23 and as a result, student come to the school with a wide range of ability levels to be addressed. This year, the school will engage in its second year as a Community School. We hope to leverage these supports to enhance our school's culture. The school boasts an expanded arts program that collaborates to supplement its in-school visual arts with the New York Edge Foundation after school program and a 21 st Century Community Learning Center Grant. Due to these, the school is able to offer students, additional offerings in theater arts, instrumental music and a variety of dance programs. These programs work together to create performances for special events during the school year. The school’s professional learning model is supported by its participation in the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), Algebra for All Citywide Initiative, District 18 Literacy in Math Matters initiative, and the Mattiese Foundations Schools Choose Grant. This will provide for additional resources to the school, including outside coaching. The school has utilized Cycles of Learning to guide its school improvement efforts. These efforts will be encapsulated through the Friday Common Planning time, used to develop instructional coherence across classrooms and grades through the continual review and revision of a fully integrated concept-based curriculum and instructional model. Created a positive school culture and supportive environment through the implementation of a Restorative Approach to School Discipline program that has: 1. Increased attendance rates from 86.8 in 2010-2011 to an average of 91.46 between the 2011-2012 and 2013-2014 school years. The school is currently on track to maintain an attendance rate over 92% for the 14-15 school year. This attendance rate was maintained for the 15-16 school year (91.7%), and 16-17 school year (91.9%). We've also maintained an upward trend in NYC School Survey results between 2010-2011 and 2013-2014. For the 17-18 school year, the school either improved or maintained its ratings on all pillars of the Great Schools Framework Report. This year the school will continue to participate in the implementation and adoption of additional Restorative Practices highlighted through the use of Restorative Circles. MSAP has developed a collaborative culture amongst the teaching staff. Teachers meet for inter-disciplinary and department meeting three times per week during the school day. In addition, the teachers regularly visit one another for both formal and informal intervisitations as part of their professional practice. This year the staff planned and implemented teacher led walkthroughs as another means to gather data for formative assessment and next steps. An SBO for the 17-18 school year has supported the school's previous decision to combine the professional learning time on Mondays and Tuesdays into a block on Fridays. This will help to continue to support the school’s current collaborative practices to ensure that data, planning instruction and formative assessments are analyzed and the results used to plan the following week’s instruction, scaffolds and supports. 2018-19 CEP 10  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school has a large number of students with disabilities. We are currently at 30%. These students have a variety of needs in both literacy and mathematics including but not limited to the need to develop fluency. Our ENL population is currently small, however, it has increased from 5% to 7 % this current school year. Our ENL students are currently struggling with the acquisition of academic vocabulary and fluency. Despite those challenges they have demonstrated significant growth over their course of their time at MSAP. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Last year, the school has demonstrated progress on a variety of elements of the Framework for Great School: Supportive Environment, Leadership, Family and Community Ties, and Trust. The inclusion of a scheduled advisory period helped us to create a more supportive environment and this had a direct impact on the school’s suspension numbers. Additionally, the school continued to leverage its strengths of its collaborative teachers by its PLC Committee revising its norms and working to create additional systems and structures to make limited collaborative time together more effective. This led to the implementation of two successful GRASP Tasks that were created an implemented by the teaching staff. This work created rigorous, real world application, CCLS tasks for students to engage in. Our instructional focus will be on the implementation of using scaffolds and supports to help students think critically. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K588 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 177 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 87.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.7% 8.5% 2.3% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.23 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 21 21 91.7% 5.6% 31.6% 87.0% 0.6% 1.7% 0 6% 6 13.9% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At MSAP teacher teams have been developed over the past five years. A collaborative culture amongst teachers is the cornerstone of professional work and learning at MSAP. The school has continued to develop its understanding of a content based curriculum and instructional model by revising school wide curriculum maps and unit plans to ensure that they are not only CCLS aligned but conceptually aligned. Units of study are themed by a specific concept which drives the instructional planning. Interdisciplinary grade teams meet once a week and department teams meet once a week to plan and adjust instruction based on data gleaned from student assessments and shared learning progression results. This year, additional systems and structures have been developed to support this work. These structures were identified as part of our school's Mid-Year Needs Assessment conducted in January of 2017 as well as additional staff surveys through the second half of the school year. As a response, a Professional Learning Communities (PLC) Committee drives the school's continued improvement efforts and to utilize the PLC framework to further structure teacher collaboration and develop teacher capacity using an inquiry model approach. Content are also members of teacher teams and are also working on school wide initiatives to conceptually align curriculum and provide students with effective feedback. Student work is tracked in a variety of ways, school wide GRASP Task results, IO Education Skedula Platform, content and teacher specific assessments and teachers’ individual conferencing/anecdotal notes. This data informs the team decisions to adjust instruction and implement specific strategies to close the gaps in student understanding that surface. Reports from teacher observations confirm that practice is growing amongst staff to continually revise lesson plans based on student data gathered from previous lessons and often from the lesson the day before. Though ongoing needs assessments there is a noted gap in teacher implementation of the agreed upon conceptual units. In ELA and Math specifically, teachers who teach the same grade are often at different places in the curriculum. This does not refer to a day to day pace, rather the broader implementation of our units of study. As a result, the school designed an SBO to ensure that the planning work of teachers and their teams be public through the creation and posting of weekly interdisciplinary pacing calendars. These will be collaboratively designed and will be used to assess teacher pacing during formal observations as well as during formative classroom walkthroughs. Teacher created GRASP Tasks helped to address some of the alignment and pacing issues that have been noted in previous years. The intention is to find very specific points in the curriculum where interdisciplinary concept-based connections can be nurtured to ensure that students are provided with aligned rigorous learning opportunities and supports at the same time in as many rooms as possible. 2018-19 CEP 13  A comprehensive needs assessment conducted in June determined that MSAP's strengths include the foundation of systems and structures that allow for teacher collaboration within and across grades and subjects on weekly interdisciplinary planning designed to address relevant student data gathered as part of formative assessment. A comprehensive review of NYS Exam and NYC Performance Task data showed a decline in performance of our 6th grade. This may be attributed to the smaller grade size. However, data for the Class of 2017 demonstrates continuous progress through a decrease of students who did not meet promotional standards on NYS ELA and Math Assessments. Based on a recent analysis of Quality Review aligned reports of the past five years, the school has identified as a priority, the need to develop teachers' capacity to facilitate students purposeful planning and questioning for discussion that facilitates thinking and student autonomy in all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 30, 2019, we will increase ELA and mathematics proficiency rating by 5% and increase our sub-populations progress by 5% on the New York State Testing Program in order to meet annual year progress. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly professional learning and planning that focuses on identifying and developing best practices for facilitating questioning for classroom discussion that facilitates thinking student autonomy in all classrooms. Collaborate with a consultant to facilitate professional learning sessions and support the development of questioning for discussion that facilitates thinking and student autonomy in all classrooms. Teacher led walk-throughs to assess the implementation of questioning for classroom discussion, critical thinking structures and student autonomy. All teachers and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 to June 2019 All teachers and paraprofessionals and students All teachers and paraprofessionals and parents All teachers Sept. 2017 Through June 2018 Ongoing July through June Principal and Teachers, Peer Collaborative Teachers and Math Coach All teachers, and Instructional Leadership Team, Principal, math Coach, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Staff developers Peer Collaborative Teachers and Math Coach Implementation of the Teachers College Writing Workshop Curriculum, Go Mathematics Curriculum, Commonweal Visual Thinking Strategies, Urban Advantage, Brooklyn Historical Society Created Equal Unit of Study, and the adoption of the Middle School Quality Initiative. All teachers Peer Collaborative teachers and math coach will each offer a minimum of 1 modeling period for intervisitation focused on the use of questioning for classroom discussion, critical thinking and developing student autonomy in addition to their other modeling periods each week. All teachers and students Sept. 2017-June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 CEP 15  Through the use of aligned parent workshops conducted by our 21st Century CBO partners, Parent Coordinator and volunteer teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher per session for the planning of school wide professional learning initiatives. 2. Hire a math coach and outside consultants to facilitate professional learning sessions and support the development of questioning for classroom discussion, use of curriculum, implementation of arts integration strategies, and alignment of assessments that facilitates thinking and student autonomy. 3. Matisse Grant will be utilized to pay for Commonweal, IO Education, Brooklyn Historical Society partnerships Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Cyclical curriculum audits inclusive of unit and lesson plans Student performance results on baseline, interim, Degrees of Reading Power assessments and end of unit performance tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student Work, staff surveys, Teacher observations, and classroom intervisitations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on a comprehensive needs assessment conducted in June of 2016, we have identified that traditionally, student responses on the learning environment survey have been far lower on average than that of both teachers and parents. Yet, student talk about feeling supported in our school. The school will leverage this strength along with small group advisories in order to build on previous year's successes. Over the course of the last three school years we have seen the following downward trend in Principal and Superintendent suspensions:  2015 - 2016: 116 suspensions  2016 - 2017: 56 suspensions  2017 - 2018: 26 suspensions In addition to the above information, staff often speak about students’ lack of investment in the school community. Furthermore, it has been recommended that the school enhance systems designed to increase student investment in their school. School safety data confirms the positive trends in school environment over the past three years and through team meetings and professional learning sessions focused on collaborative inquiry the staff determined a need to “teach” students the specific social-emotional skills that they may be lacking when they come to the school. The Friday Enrichment block for students has helped to increase average attendance on Fridays in the school and helped students to become more invested in their education and commitment to the school. Additionally, the school saw gains in student achievement through its targeted use of interventions in its first cycle of inquiry. As a result, the staff have identified the need to develop strong relationships with students and plans to incorporate restorative practices instructional program this year and help students become autonomous learners through the use of goal setting and reflective practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 30, 2019 the Middle School for Art and Philosophy will decrease the number of principal and superintendent suspensions by 5% as measured by the OORS report through the implementation of restorative practices, systems, structures and protocols. 2018-19 CEP 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identify student leaders to serve on the School Leadership Team to ensure greater student voice in the implementation of restorative practices, RTI and student enrichment activities. Parent Workshops to build the capacity of parents to understand how the school is creating a Supportive Environment for their children and how they can support the school's vision. Develop a school wide calendar for professional practice related to advisory as well as for the programs themselves to ensure that there are opportunities for students to reflect on social-emotional and academic progress. This will include a student goal setting and reflection process, revision of school wide norms for discussion aligned to dispositions and other inquiry steps that will follow. Selected/volunteer staff will engage in training on Restorative Practices Create time in the instructional program for teachers to work with small groups of students for the express purposes of advisory (restorative circles) and targeted RTI All students Principal Sept. 2018 Ongoing October 2018-June 2019 Ongoing July 2018 through June 2019 Parents All teachers and students Selected/volunteer staff All teachers and students Principal, teachers, Guidance Counselor Principal and teacher leaders Selected/volunteer staff 2018-19 CEP 18 Integrate 21 st Century Community Learning Center Programs and New York Edge to address the programmatic requests of students and parents and include a specialized high school prep component, targeted parent workshops that support the school's vision All students, parents and 21st Century Program staff Sept 2018 to June 2019 Principal and teacher leaders Program Coordinator Implement a Friday Enrichment Program that allows for student choice of activities. All students Implement Restorative approach to discipline through circles, responsive classrooms, and peer mediation. All students Provide incentive trips for successful students using our digital portfolios data in Skedula. Provide cultural responsiveness and mental health trainings for all staff members, Use Skedula online grade and workbook to track academic and behavioral anecdotals to provide targeted interventions to individual students, advisory groups, and parents. Sept.2018 to June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Program coordinator Principal, Guidance Counselor, Staff Developers, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the use of aligned parent workshops conducted by our 21st Century CBO partners, Parent Coordinator and volunteer teachers. The school community will conduct a needs assessment of parents to determine the topics for workshops based on their current needs. September through June - monitored by our CSD. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher per diem to support continued training in restorative practices. (T1, SWP) 2. Teacher per session to conduct 21 st Century Academic Programs. (21 st C) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 19  Identify and/or create a calendar of reflection opportunities throughout the school year. By October 2018, our school wide advisory program will be up and running with a stable groups of students assigned to teachers. By November 2018 all students will have created goals for their social-emotional and academic growth. By December 2018, we will have a functional student council that has input on decisions regarding school culture. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly check of the OORS Suspension Report by Race, Gender, and IEP Data; Student Survey Data, bi-weekly Skedula anecdotal log reviews, and student advisory goals sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year, the school intends to refine its work of the past two years to fully realize the potential of the vast amount of professional learning that we have engaged in. The refinement of practice will focus primarily on individual and teacher team accountability through the enhancement of structures for teacher practice. The 2017-2018 Quality Review highlighted that MSAPs curricular tasks are planned and refined using student data, our teachers use of rubrics and personalized feedback to students, and our students ability to speak to the use of rubrics to assess their work. The 2017 - 2018 Quality Review also stated that there were missed opportunities for student ownership for learning in areas such as collaborative group work and class discussions and that students were working on the same examples of work in a few classrooms. As a result of these findings the school has placed value the importance of the combined professional learning time on Fridays the focus of that work will be to use data to create next instructional steps based on student need. This will include the creation of differentiated tasks, scaffolds and supports that will lead students to greater autonomy across classrooms. We will begin to align specific meeting times for specific tasks to ensure that all of the school’s work can be prioritized and honored. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will build their internal leadership capacity and increase their impact on student achievement by analyzing Data Driven Classroom, benchmark assessments, and DRP scores every 6 weeks to identify strategies and solutions for the departments problem of practice. They will monitor and revise units of study to ensure access to all learners. 2018-19 CEP 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly professional learning and planning that focuses on identifying and developing best practices for aligning the use of data, planning, instruction and assessment. Collaborate with a consultant to facilitate professional learning sessions and support the development of structured teacher walk-throughs resulting in inter-visitations and cross-grade and disciplinary conversations that support the implementation of a fully integrated concept-based curriculum and instructional model. All teachers and paraprofessionals Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Math Coach, and all All students Teachers All teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal and Instructional Leadership Team All teachers Teacher teams (interdisciplinary and departmental) will conduct cycles inquiry to address gaps surfaced in formative assessments for each unit of instruction. All teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 2018-19 CEP 22 Teacher led walkthrough to assess the implementation of the aligned curriculum and scaffolds of support. Teacher led inquiry teams to examine formative assessment data and inform next steps for students in the four core subject areas. This will serve as a foundation for the modification of curriculum maps based on the needs of students Common planning time embedded in the school day 4 times a week to increase the amount of collaborative planning for daily lesson plan revisions, analysis of student work, and modifications to provide access for all learners. Teachers will also plan re-teach lessons for the unit. All teachers All students and teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 All teachers, Instructional Leadership Team Hire a math coach and peer collaborative teachers to coach, model demonstration lab-sites, and facilitate peer-intervisitations. Integrate mini-planning retreats for professional development sessions in the school year calendar to increase the effectiveness of PLC cycles. All teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal and Instructional Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the use of aligned parent workshops conducted by our 21st Century CBO partners, Parent Coordinator and volunteer teachers. The school community will conduct a needs assessment of parents to determine the topics for workshops based on their current needs. September through June - monitored by our CSD. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher per session for the planning of school wide professional learning initiatives. 2. Hire staff developers to facilitate professional learning sessions and support the development of teacher walkthroughs.+ 3. Peer Collaborative Teachers and Math coach to facilitate professional learning and collaboration with teachers. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019 teacher teams will engage in a data cycle of progress monitoring which includes the revision units of study and daily lesson plans in order to address student learning gaps. measured using the following systems: The impact of each activity will be  Student performance levels of the Common Core Learning Standards on the Fall Baseline assessment in mathematics which will be administered in October. Student performance levels of the Common Core Learning Standards on the Fall Benchmark assessments in ELA and mathematics which will be administered in December. Student reading performance levels on the Degrees of Reading Power assessment in which will be administered in September, January, and May. Student performance levels of the Common Core Learning Standards on the Spring Benchmark assessments in ELA and mathematics which will be administered in February. Students performance levels of the Common Core Learning Standards on the unit based performance tasks in their content area classes which are tracked in Skedula using Data Driven Classroom platform every 6 weeks.  Completion of digital feedback forms from activity participants at the end of each professional development     and 6 week coaching cycle.  Analysis of teacher and staff feedback by the School Development Committee.  Cyclical curriculum audits inclusive of unit and daily lesson plans.  Student performance results from baseline and interim assessments, DRP assessment, performance tasks, and teacher assessments.  Daily teacher assessments consisting of three checks for understanding embedded into lesson plans.  Review of unit plans by instructional coaches, lead teachers, and school administration.  Review of instructional plans by members of the administration and its alignment to the school-wide   Administrative observations conducted based on implementation of strategies researched in teacher  Professional Learning Communities. instructional focus. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher survey data, Data Driven Classroom platform, meeting agendas and minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The last Quality Review conducted during the 2017 - 2018 school year noted that the school demonstrated a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best across all classrooms. Also noted was that the school's action plans were based on student data analysis. This trend was also noted in the Learning Environment Survey in which Effective Leadership saw an increase from 3.75 to 3.80 rating. This year, we will implement, weekly student work analysis and team planning during content area team meetings. This year the priority will be to utilize systems more effectively to provide targeted support to those teachers who's ratings are in the Ineffective and Developing ratings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, The Middle School for Art and Philosophy will increase pedagogical practices and MOTP overall ratings as per Advance by building capacity through teacher leadership and professional development, creating 3 professional learning communities (PLCs) cycles (fall, winter, and spring) and implementing cycles of instructional rounds. 2018-19 CEP 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers and paraprofessional Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and all teachers All students  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Weekly professional learning and planning that focuses on identifying and developing best practices for aligning the use of data, planning, instruction and assessment. Prioritize the observation schedule to support those teachers in the ineffective and developing areas by scheduling them first. Collaborate with a consultant to facilitate professional learning sessions and support the development of structured teacher walk-throughs resulting in inter-visitations and cross-grade and disciplinary conversations that support the implementation of a fully integrated concept-based curriculum and instructional model. Targeted use of teacher level supports via Peer Collaborative Teacher and Math Coach Develop and coordinate the efforts of the school's Teacher Leadership Team as a structure for shared decision making and professional learning. 2018-19 CEP 26 Teacher teams (interdisciplinary and departmental) will conduct cycles inquiry to address gaps surfaced in formative assessments for each unit of instruction. All teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and District Level Coach Participate in a collegial study group (critical friends) facilitated by a consultant from Community Schools District 18 office. Conduct 1 on 1 monthly coaching meetings with targeted teachers to provide actionable feedback. All teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal Develop a mental health and wellness PD series to support the social emotional health needs of the adults within the community All staff Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Principal and staff developers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will provide parent workshops that help to clarify school wide expectations for student work and behavior in classes, review student work and goal setting and core academic subjects. The workshops will be ongoing from September 2018through June 2019. The Parent Coordinator and Community School Director will be responsible for the implementation and monitoring of workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher per session for the planning of school wide professional learning initiatives. 2. Hire a consultant to facilitate professional learning sessions and support the development of teacher walkthroughs 3. Peer Collaborative Teachers to facilitate professional learning with teachers. 4. 21st Century Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 CEP 27  By February 2019, identified teachers will have demonstrated progress of one HEDI proficiency level in two (2) of the following components of the Danielson Framework: 1e, 3b, 3c and 3d Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has traditionally fallen just shy of citywide averages on the NYC Learning Environment Survey. Though the school has shown improvement in the response rates of parents on the learning environment survey (a positive trend for the past four years it declined last year) we cannot predict what the results of the survey will be. The school has traditionally offered a wide variety of programs to parents through its 21 st Century Community Learning Grant in addition to parent workshops designed specifically to look at student work. To address the high levels of need of the school concerning social-emotional learning, as well as the research of Bryck, the school plans to engage parents in different ways this year. This may include an SBO for the re-purposing of the Tuesday parent engagement time to create a block to combine parent engagement time for the month so that teachers can hold monthly workshops for parents so that they can articulate the next steps in the curriculum, tell students what their child will be engaging in during the next month and what they can do to support their child in that work. The school intends to create mandated workshops for parents to attend. Through a structured and pre-planned calendar of events and system of notification, we hope to increase parent engagement this school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 30, 2019, at least 20% of parents will have attended at least two parent workshops and Parent Teacher Association meetings offered by the school as measured through collected attendance sheets and the 21st Centuray Parent Participation Tracker. 2018-19 CEP 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a comprehensive offering of parent workshops based on parent need and interest as measured through an online survey. All parents Create an SBO to combine parent engagement time to conduct monthly academic informational meetings for parents. Survey parents for their input on workshop offerings for the coming school year. All parents All parents Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, all teachers, parent coordinator Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, all teachers, Parent Coordinator Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, all teachers, parent coordinator Communication:  Purchase school wide access to the IO Education online grading system to offer parents 24/7 access to their child's performance data  Purchase the School Messenger and SonarCloud automated calling system to increase mass communication with homes.  Utilize the Remind text messaging system as an additional mode of communication with parents.  Pre-plan and schedule all parent workshops for the school year and communicate the schedule to parents via the school's website and a paper calendar. - All parents, students and teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, all teachers, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 CEP 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Leadership Inc., Triad Consulting, Urban Arts, Urban Advantage, Matisse Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. A comprehensive offering of parent workshops to meet parent needs. 2. Additional workshops to support identified parent needs based on the results of a given survey. 3. A positive SBO vote to move combine and move the parent engagement time. 4. IO Education and School Messenger, Remind and www.ms-ap.org systems 5. Sonarcloud Parent Communication System. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 15% of parents will have attended multiple workshops that have been offered. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Workshop attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS Exam Scores, formative assessment data and report card data Mathematics NYS Exam Scores, formative assessment dataand report card data Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group Large group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) In school and after school Small group In School After school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 21 st Century Academic Programs - project based learning New York Edge After School Programs - small group tutoring In school RTIsupport using MSQI Small Group Strategic Reading Intervention Model Sustained Silent Reading 21 st Century Academic Programs- project based learning New York Edge After School Programs- small group tutoring In schoolRTIsupport through Math Lab class Math Intervention Class dependent upon budget 2018-19 CEP 32  Science Formative assessment dataand report card data. 21 st Century Academic Programs- project basedlearning Small group In school Social Studies Formative assessment data and report card data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher Team Recommendations and all confirming hard data referred to the PPT and SIT New York Edge After School Programs- small grouptutoring Living Environment Regents course In school RTIsupportthrough the MSQI Reading Intervention Period 21 st Century Academic Programs- project basedlearning New York Edge After School Programs- small grouptutoring In school RTIsupport through MSQI Strategic Reading Intervention Period 21 st Century Academic Programs- project basedlearning New York Edge After School Programs- small grouptutoring Advisory/restorative circles Large group After school Small group After school Large group In-school In-school Small group After school In-school In school RTIsupport Large group 2018-19 CEP 33  Sustained Silent Reading 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Eleven (11) STH students are provided with uniforms on an as needed basis; access to basic emergency supplies and school supplies, specific workshops designed for the parents of students in temporary housing and preference when registering in after school programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 36  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. This year the school will seek partnerships with private colleges and universities to establish a steady stream of highly qualified candidates. Each year teacher assignments are developed through a review of current teacher practice and assignment, teacher requests via a preference sheet and NYS data results. In addition to professional development provided by both the school, the District and the BFSC MSAP has enlisted the support of a consultant (Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development) to plan and implement rigorous professional development to support the ongoing improvement of professional practice on the following topics but not limited to: differentiated instruction, curriculum mapping, using data to inform instruction, aligning assessments, developing learning progressions, questioning for classroom discussion, designing coherent instruction, effective feedback, engaging teachers in learning walks, and the Danielson Framework for Teaching 2013. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). At the end of the last school year, teachers began to create professionals goals with the principal for the following school year. These individual goals are aligned to the school wide goals contained in this document as well as the school wide data to inform next steps for the whole school community and for small groups and individual teachers. Teachers are given recommended next steps to engage in their own self-directed professional development on their individual needs and goals. This year, the school focus all prior professional learning on refining its planning practices to be more responsive to student need. In this way, MSAP differentiates professional development to meet the needs of all members of the staff. The principal conducts teacher observations and looks for evidence of teachers meeting these goals during visits. This information is used to adjust professional development to address gaps in teacher pedagogy. This is a process that continues throughout the year and also solicits feedback from teachers after major professional development days and a mid-year survey. In addition to the expertise contained within the administration and the District, the school plans to secure the services of a consultant. The school also leverages its Learning Partners Plus Program cohort to provide peer to peer collaborations and professional learning opportunities. The school will continue the practice of capturing professional learning on the school’s website. The Professional Learning Locker contains links and documents from professional learning session conducted both in and out of the school. These are available for teachers’ reference 24-7. 2018-19 CEP 37  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers were represented in the MOSL committee that met at the start of the year to discuss and create the list of MOSL selections that would be used as part of this year’s Teacher Effectiveness. In addition, the school’s instructional focus from last year will continue to builds off of last year’s work and will drive the creation and use of interim assessments to measure student progress. Teachers have been provided additional input into this process through their teacher teams and that information flows upwards from the teams, through their team leaders to the Teacher Leadership Team where teachers and administrators collaborate to make all key school wide decisions concerning curriculum, instruction, assessment and grading. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 CEP 38  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 158,555 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,707,072 X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Professional Learning (5A Part 4a,b; 5c Part 4a,b; 5D Part 4a, b) Teacher Teams (5A Part 3; 5C Part 3, 5D Part 3) JupiterGrades (5E Part 3) School Messenger (5E Part 3)) Parent Workshops (5A Part 3;5BPart 3;5C Part 3; 5DPart 3;5EPart 3) Professional Learning (5A Part 4a,b; 5c Part 4a,b; 5D Part 4a, b) Teacher Teams(5A Part 3; 5C Part 3, 5D Part 3) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 2018-19 CEP 39  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School for Art and Philosophy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Middle School for Art and Philosophy will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP 41  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   2018-19 CEP 42  conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School for Art and Philosophy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 CEP 43  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 CEP 44  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities attend mandated workshops held by the school;   monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department  learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 CEP 45   share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 3. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 46  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy has been implemented in a limited way due to the lack of a CSD. Currently, the school has utilized 21st Century grant monies to create opportunities for extended learning time for students in academic courses and arts enrichment. We have partnered with two other community schools to begin to create pathways from middle to high school. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June of 2018 at least 50% of students and families will have participated in some way in resources provided to the school through the Community Schools Initiative and aligned resources. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By achieving our Community School Goal we anticipate that both students and their families will be exposed to clear expectations for behavior, performance and supports that students will develop and acquire the skills needed to become autonomous learners. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Urban Arts Target Population All students Leadership, Inc. All families Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Provide academic and enrichment extended learning opportunities. X Hire a CSD to facilitate the implementation of the CS model and resources. Provide workshops based on parent need and interest. 2018-19 CEP 47  Triad Consulting Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment All teachers Triad will deliver professional learning sessions to staff members on engaging families Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources include: a Community School Director, the school's Parent Coordinator, Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The school is currently looking for a Community School Director. The vision for the role is for the CSD to work hand in glove with the school's current staff and resources to build relationships within the community and with our elementary feeder schools to create a pipeline of students who will attend the school. The school has currently worked to align all of its resources to create a seamless day for students. This includes the alignment and cooperation of our 21st Century and Sports and Arts initiatives,. We leverage our partnership with Interborough's Mobile School Response Team to provide families access to the right services at the right time. AS the school continues to provide 2018-19 CEP 48  workshops for parents (often ties to PTA meetings) we will provide opportunities for parents to become more actively engaged in the decision making processes here at the school. The CSD when hired will be an integral part of a number of the school's teams including the cabinet and PPT to ensure that individual student data can be reviewed and used to plan opportunities for support. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students CSD - yet to be hired. The will be responsible for coordinating all of the CS initiatives in the school. Traid - will provide professional learning to staff based on the school's needs. Leadership Inc. - will provide parent workshops based on the needs of the school community. Urban Arts and Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation - will provide extended learning and enrichment opportunities for students to engage in. Interborough Mobile School Response Team - will provide families access to a variety of resources based on individual family's needs. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Community School Director Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. November 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP 49  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 18 School Name Middle School for Art and Philosophy School Number 588 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Neil J McNeill, Jr. Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Juliana Fischer-Smith Teacher/Subject Area Grace Benjamin - ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Brickey - Teacher Related-Service Provider Nina Perchenok - SETSS Superintendent Beverly Wilkins Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Lea Denis Parent Andria Barry Parent Coordinator Camille Sealy Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette Fougere Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP 50  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 196 Total number of ELLs 16 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? New students who are arriving to the country or from out of state take the NYSITELL, after the HLS and in-depth interview. Based on how they perform on the NYSITELL, students either create a writing sample or are provided with Fountas and Pinnell workbooks which are then used to develop basic BICS and CALP. Students progress is individually monitored and Newcomer students are provided with an increased level of support in their home language when they are being assessed on an academic skills. This places a focus on biliteracy, building towards fluency in English, while circumventing many of the challenges of new language acquistion. Student progress is also monitored on iReady, MyON, formative and summative assessments curriculum-embedded assessments, projects, and on state and local examinations. Through an increase in co-planning, interdisciplinary project-based assessments are also used to monitor student growth through multiple entry points of instruction and rigorous tasks, to accurately monitor ELLs progress in an individualized manner which ensures student growth and success. Once a 2018-19 CEP 51  child's level is determined, instructors are able to prescribe specific instruction to meet the needs of the student. While the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT serve as a benchmark for student progress, students are also monitored through the four modes of language through oral presentations, quick writes, listening activities, and reading tasks in the ENL classroom, as well as in the integrated classroom throughout the school year. ELL students have shown significant progress on the NYC Performance Assessment results. This has been attributed to the number of specific scaffolds and supports that they have received during their periods of regular instruction with their peers. As we shift to a 1:1 laptop model, students will also be assessed using leveled Epic!Books, which provides a broad range of digitial books for independent reading, simultaneously monitoring their lexile level and content comprehension through targeted quizzes. Math teachers have been guided as per how to increase scaffolds for ELLs through TPR, vizual aids, graphic organizers, and language objectives in their lesson plans. There will be an overall increase in scaffolds for ELLs in each subject area with the goal of ELL students all performing on grade level by 2019. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL teacher provides supports to all core areas which will increase in the coming school year to include art and gym/ health content work. While the ENL teacher could not attend every single class, MSAP uses Google Drive to faclitate co-planning. This allows for, and will continue to expand upon, alignment across curriculum for all ELL students. The Common Core Standards drive curriculum and assessment while overarching themes are consistent across unit plans for each subject area. This provides thematic context for increased comprehension of subject material for all students, including ELLs, with differentiation of instruction to address specific language learning needs. Integrated instruction in ELA and Social Studies allow for continual individual monitoring which is discussed between the content teachers and the ENL teacher. The content teachers in ELA teach using the co-teaching model and the parallel teaching model, depending on the teacher and the amount of ELLs in the room, to address language objectives and target key vocabulary, grammar, academic skills, and context for all students to learn decoding and cross-curricular inference skills. Assitance from paraprofessionals permits ELL students to have individualized support in all classroom settings. This has contributed to success, especially for ELL students with IEPs. In the ENL classroom, students are partnered with i+1 learning partners to advance in their Zone of Proximal Development. ELLs are also grouped periodically according to home language, to ensure advancement to 90-95% of the ENL class to be in English. The ENL room is arrranged with flexible seating providing opportunities for partner work, group work, and individual work. Class sizes are also kept small to ensure individual moniitoring. Monitoring progress in all activities and assignments beyond state and official tests allows for a comprehensive overview of L student progress without accessing their anxiety threshold. Exams, project-based assessments, and quizzes will be structured according to a clear and outright syllabus distributed at the start of the school year to lower the anxiety threshold surrounding being assessed on materials. Surrounding state exams, ENL lessons are targeted to differentiate test taking strategies and review information, while scaffolding and developing protocols for inferential and independent thinking in the target language. There are many outlets for creativity in the assessment structure, which will only increase as co-planning and co-teaching increases over the next two years. Some instances of this were the interdisciplinary GRASP task, which targeted crosscurricular inferences and rigorous thinking to address authentic problems in the community with student driven solultions. In one 6th grade ELA class, of which the majority of 6th grade ELLs are a member, students were held to goal setting project based assessments during Camp NaNoWriMo (National Novel Writing Month) to faciliate and assess narrative and expository writing. Creative project based assessments will continue to allow for multiple entry points to facilitate student learning and success. Student success is also ensured through extra help services through the 21st Century program provided after school and through the Sports and Arts program, which integrates the arts into academics and provides opportunities for both BICS and CALP development. Creating a positive classroom environment has been essential to ELL language acquisition and a structure of positive reinforcement, classroom discussion norms, and positive attitudes towards bilingualism allows for an increased level of monitoring of language acquisition in the four modalities, circumventing behavior. PDs on the stages of language acquisition, cultural sensitivity, advantageous ELL groupings, integration of language objectives, decoding skills, and basic conversational Spanish for classroom commands and communication will emerge over the next two years. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Student growth is monitored through ongoing project and skill based assements throughout the school year.As our ENL program grows, structured syllabi will be distributed to parents and students at curriculum night at the start of the school year. This will include clear dates for each in class assessment and project, as well as upcoming state and local exams. An 2018-19 CEP 52  increased level of transparency with planning will circumvent many anxiety inducing factors for our L population to render accurate and evaluative results. Our program is evaluated on an ongoing basis to ensure we are meeting our indivdual ELL needs for academic success. The program is monitored for progress by teachers and the administrative team. This is done through the use of NYSESLAT data, Jupiter Grades, classroom assessments and state exams. We also monitor progress by looking at learning progressions for writing. Ultimately the final mark of success comes from seeing if we met AYP for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? There are several structures in place to address interventions for ELLs once the summative data has been gathered. Several of these structures are being improved upon as the ENL program expands. Individual conferencing serves as an opportunity for individual goal setting for ELL students. ELL students with IEPs are also held to goals to measure their academic and language growth. Individual extra help and increased scaffolding is provided for students that are in need of additional assistance. If students are performing above grade level, they are given more rigorous work. As the program grows, students will continue to be given increased RTI, as needed. Other structures for intervention are increased parent contact, open communication with the student, student set goals, adjusted pull out schedules, increased modification of integrated work, and the development of a more thorough accountable reading program. Students will be responsible for one independent reading project each month for which they will produce choice projects, centered around their readings, that will serve as additional measures of student learning. To increase science literacy, experiential learning opportunities will increase, with augmented scaffolds. Furthermore, elements of Math Navigator will be integrated with iReady to make math literacy more accessible. As the 1:1 laptop program grows, the flipped classroom approach will be used to increase the reach of direct, individualized instruction for all ELLs. This will allow for more rigorous instruction for advanced students and for increased assistance and monitoring for students that need the extra boost. Structures from Scholastic LitCamp and Pearson's Math Navigator will be implemented to increase accountable student driven success. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] MSAP uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework in several different ways. Our school has three tiers of RTI instruction.UDL StrategiesTier 1 – teacher driven intervention, whole class instructionTier 2 – small group instruction, additional support from teacher and/or push-in teacherTier 3 – 1:1 (individual) interventions, which focuses on specific strategies and skills to be implemented by AIS providers.ELL students and their data are reviewed and students may be assigned to one or more of the following programs: 21st Century Academic Program, Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation Program, Saturday Acceleration Program, or our schools intervention pull out program. In addition to the programs mentioned all of the ELL students use MyON and their lexile levels are assessed and tracked, as are the results of DRAs. Both measures are used to determine next steps for ELL students which include modified instruction and school wide strategies including Reading for Meaning and Task Rotation. Students are also being taught isolated grammar and grammar in context through structures presented in readings to improve reading and writing skills simultaneously. This approach has been proven effective by Langer, while Krashen is a promotor of grammar in context. By using the two approaches, it provides multiple entry points for targeted improvements. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, MOSL, NYS ELA, and NYS Math and Science exams are used to evaluate and inform the ENL program at K588. The data reveals that students are demonstrating progress on the listening and speaking portions of the NYSESLAT exam but are having difficulty on the writing. Reading results on the NYSESLAT have varied, with our newest students demonstrating the weakest scores. The ELA MOSL and NYS ELA assist in identifying students that are approaching grade level and what areas they are struggling in in their core class subjects . While the Math exam, and Science exam for grade 8, are provided in the home language, classroom instruction for those subjects is not. Students' scores remain low in these subject areas, regardless if they are provided in the home language. This renders the exam a source of information for lapses in cultural and academic material, for accurate test comprehension, when traversing the linguistic gap. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 CEP 53  Team meetings occur throughout the team with leaders from each department, the literacy team, and the math team, as well as the entire staff, during which student scores are discussed. If any adjustments need to be made, they are planned as a team and best suited to the individual student needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL is organized in accordance with the mandated number of instructional minutes allotted according to CR Part 154.2. Students receive integrated ENL in their ELA classes with small group instruction groups or integrated co-teaching minutes and individual monitoring. Integrated ENL is administered in a graded, block, heterogeneous class. Standalone ENL,this year, began mid-year with the hiring of a new ENL teacher. Due to limited scheduling availability, and the small number of students who needed pullout services, students were grouped in an ungraded heterogenous grouping. Next school year, and in the subsequent years, grade bands 7 and 8 will be grouped together, in a heterogenous setting with only two consecutive proficiency levels in each group. Grade 6 will be grouped in two separate heterogenous groups, with only two consecutive proficiency levels in each group, in a block grouping as the population dictates for upcoming years. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit ENL hours are delivered in accordance to part 154.2. Students receive integrated ENL minutes in their ELA , and Social Studies, classes. Classes are co-taught or students work within small groups, pending on the subject matter and skills necessary for that day's lesson. Students receive stand alone ENL minutes in the ENL classroom. Lessons cover thematic topics in alignment with the school's unit plans, providing opportunities for vocabulary development, comprehension of historical and/or language context, and opportunities to target individual and leveled language needs in the four language modes. The integrated minutes are delivered with extensive co-planning across curriculum, which then extends to the small group setting. This allows for an increase in differentiated resources and assessing areas where growth is needed. Intervisitation between subject areas facilitates growth in addressing the needs of ELLs, including what resources are needed in the integrated model and what areas need to be addressed in the self contained room for student improvement in all subject areas. HLA is not provided at MSAP at this time; however, students do have access to bilingual resources that they can use during independent reading time. Newcomer students receive directions on worksheets and in class activities, in their home language, as well as English, to ensure they are clear on what the task entails.Regarding the Freestanding ENL Push-in/Pull-out program, entering ELLS receive 180 minutes integrated ENL and 180 minutes stand-alone; emerging ELLs receive 90 minutes stand-alone, 180 minutes integrated, and 90 minutes flex which may be used as integrated or stand-alone minutes; transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes integrated ENL and 90 minutes flex which may be used as integrated or stand-alone minutes; expanding ELLS receive 180 integrated minutes, Commanding ELLS receive 90 minutes integrated ELA or approved Former ELL services for up to 2 2018-19 CEP 54  years. In addition, the ENL teacher collaborates with the content area teachers to maintain a dialogue regarding ELL students' performance in their content area classes 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All of our students are scheduled to receive ten periods of ELA instruction per week while simultaneously meeting their CR Part 154 mandates in ENL. The content areas are delivered in English, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible and enrich language development includes: differentiated instruction; use of graphic organizers as a tool for scaffolding instruction; small group instruction; use of visuals as an added support; explicit vocabulary instruction in the content areas; mini-lessons that incorporate modeling, read-alouds, and think-alouds; the buddy system (support from peers of the same native language). The materials used in the content areas include translated texts, bilingual glossaries, and MyON in Spanish. MS 588 has adopted a Balanced Literacy approach in the instruction of content areas. Students are provided with the opportunity to do read-alouds, shared, and independent reading. The writers workshop model is also implemented and students become more knowledgeable about the writing process with the steps of the writing process supporting further language development and writing skills. In addition, students maintain a writing journal. Additional scaffolding is provided through bridging/building background knowledge, schema building, contextualization, text representation, and metacognition. Students are also assisted during work periods and conference with their teachers in and out of class. Informal assessments are administered regularly as well. Additional small group AIS sessions for each grade prior to all state assessments are offered to focus on literacy and academic language. In addition, school wide adopted strategies like Reading for Meaning and task Rotation have provided all students including the ELLs with multiple access to the curriculum providing them with the opportunity to meet the expectation of the CCLS. Core content instructors are provided with additional scaffolds, such as picture dictionaries, scaffolded writing guides, and co-teaching strategies to better assist individual ELL needs. The self-contained ENL classes also employs themes and topics from core content areas to augment metacognitive skills and encourage inferences across subject lines, as well as to develop a context and vocabulary set for each subject area students will encounter as they develop their CALP. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELLs are assessed with the Spanish LAB. In addition, students can take certain state tests in their home languages when available, as well as using home language glossaries for support. When available, during the year, students are able to read translated passages and receive feedback in their native language from adults in the building who are able to translate for the classroom teacher. In addition, teachers regularly use Google translate online to provide students with feedback in their home language to circumvent linguistic barriers in the event when scaffolds and cirucmlocution are ineffective. This year, the use of myON in Spanish will allow continual assessment of those students throughout the school year. As students grow to use the bilingual libraries in the ENL classroom and work more closely in both their home language and English to establish biliteracy, in preparation for high school and the biliterate programs the chancellor is making available, there will be an increase in projects that enable students to read and write in both languages. The positive attitude towards biliteracy fosters growth in English, while embracing ELL's home languages and culture. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Regarding the SIFE population, there is an urgency to provide academic intervention services as an extension to the regular school program of pull-out services. The following interventions are also implemented:--Development of an individualized student needs assessment.--Creation of an AIS plan for the student with focus on the literacy and math components.--Grade and age appropriate instructional support materials.--Differentiation of instruction in all areas. b. The school provides the following resources to facilitate the transition of Newcomers: 2018-19 CEP 55  --An informal student orientation. --A buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class who will assist the Newcomer during the day. --An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. --Encourage students to participate in Academic Intervention supports. --Home school communication. c. The instructional plan implemented for ENLs receiving services 4 to 6 years, is one that will allow them to demonstrate growth in the acquisiton of the second language and equally make annual progress in their state ELA and math exams, and achieve academically in all their content area classes. That is, beyond explicit ENL instruction, collaboration between teachers will ensure that the language needs of the ELLs are taken into consideration. Some aspects of this policy include: --ELA and other content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning. --Math teachers support students in understanding difficult word problems and require students to make verbal explanations of the problems they work on. --Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlases, and illustrations to increase comprehension. d.The plan for long-term ENLs (those ENLs having completed 6 years of ESL) is to analyze their NYSESLSAT scores, as well as those of their ELA and Math assessments to identify any problem areas. Past analysis of our students has revealed deficiencies in both reading and writing. Our action plan for this subgroup involves focus on the specific identified deficiencies, shared strategic methods in all content areas to address these delays, differentiating for students' literacy needs and monitoring their progress in all content areas.These students are also provided with specific academic supports to ensure academic growth and help in any language development areas that they may still struggle in to facilitate academic and linguistic success.e. Former ELLs have access to MyON to allow for continued support of their diverse reading levels on content area texts. In addition, they are permitted to have testing accommodations for up to two years after testing out on the NYSESLAT. ENL students who transition to proficiency receive support from their homeroom/classroom teachers, AIS providers, and guidance team in collaboration with the ENL teacher. Additionally, these students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL service. The ENL teacher also welcomes former ELLs to attend their 21st Century After School program to continue facilitating long term skills for academic success. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The plan for ELLs identified as having special needs is to:--Ensure that teachers of students with an IEP are familiar with students’ particular needs and all services are provided according to the IEP mandates.--Collaboration between the ENL teacher, classroom teachers, and IEP contact person to monitor student progress. Not only are these teachers on the literacy team, but they engage in active conferencing outside of it. The ENL teacher also collaborates with the Parent Coordinator, the SRT, and other IEP assessors to ensure their students are receiving all of the services necessary for their long term success.Instructional interventions for ELL students with IEPs include extended day instruction in ELA (using materials such as Empire State) and Math (using materials such as Number Power). The teachers align curriculum with the ENL teacher and differentiate instruction in the classroom to provide targeted instructional support on an individual basis. ELL students have also been identified and included in Inquiry Team Cohorts as part of teachers' action research in best practices to move student achievement forward. As assigned, paraprofessionals assist with several of the ELL students with IEPs to ensure continuous individualized monitoring and support for language growth and development. The school has adopted a number of instructional strategies used to help provide all students including ELLs with multiple entry points in to the curriculum, for example, Reading for Meaning and Task Rotation. Teachers are using grade level materials like CodeX and CMP3 as well as other leveled materials to help support ENL-SWDs with access to academic content and English language development. This includes translated text as part of the MyON program. A Young Adult varied level library is in the ENL room, as well as home language dictionaries, home language phrase books, home language glossaries, test preparation resources, and bilingual resources . The materials were reviewed by teachers to determine their age and grade appropriateness and measured against the NYC DOE Instructional Materials Review Rubric to help ensure access to a rigorous curriculum. The ENL program also implements elements of EngageNY and AchieveNYC curriculums to deliver differentiated 2018-19 CEP 56  and leveled instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school programs flexibly for student needs as dictated on IEPs. This is reviewed by the School Implementation Team and PPT. Where applicable, students who are exceeding benchmarks on established assessments, and who have demonstrated social/emotional progress measured by interim progress reports and recommendations by the classroom teachers and guidance counselor, are recommended to the school assessment team for consideration to be part of the ICT classes. The ENL teacher pushes into the the self-contained rooms to provide individual support for the Ls with LD, the ICT room to assist the ELLs with IEPs, and the general ed classes. This ensures that all ELLs, regardless of IEP status, receive their mandated services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The range of intervention services for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas include: MyON (for all ELL's and other students, used in content area classes regularly) to support varied reading levels; Saturday Academy, which focuses on reading comprehension strategies and skillls in ELA and developing competencies in math standards, specifically number sense and problem solving, as well as test preparation. This is often students in the bottom third but it also includes our ELL students who have given priority access to the program based on their current data which is listed in numberous previous sections of this plan and does not bear repeating. In addition, the program has been designed so that students will be able to preview work that that will engage with the following week. This provides them a level of comfort to participate with the content during the regular school week. When possible, the school will have translated versions of the text students will use during these intervention programs. Futhermore, ELL students participate in the Sports and Arts program (September through June, Monday through Thursday) to help them to facilitate second language acquisition. Within the content area classrooms, teachers pair ELLs with higher performing students, some of whom are same language speakers and some who are English speakers, when needed to faciliate language and content acquisition. Small group instruction, dual language materials, and the use of technology also support the intervention needs of ELLs. During teacher team meetings teachers discuss strategies to further address the needs of ELLs within the classrooms. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The use of specific scaffolds aligned to the learning progressions for writing. This work is directly aligned to the school's instructional focus as well as the cycles of inquiry that will be used this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs such as the after-school programs (21st Century, Sports and Arts and Saturday Acceleration Program) and extra-curricular activities through flyers, letters translated in the home language, and phone calls to parents where necessary. Because these students are in targeted sub-groups, they receive priority access to all extra-curricular and supplemental programs in the school. ELL students participate in programs with general education English language speakers. The 21st Century Program provides accelerated instruction through a project based learning model and arts enrichment (dance and instrumental music) and the Saturday Acceleration Program will provide ELL students with at-risk services that include ELA and math tutoring, social emotional development (peer mediation and guidance) as well as the opportunity to accelerate their learning for the following week. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 CEP 57  The instructional materials used to support ELLs are composed of multi-level, multi-genred, and multi-grade tradebooks, textbooks across the content areas, teacher-created-differentiated materials, workbooks, test prep materials, reference books,DOE approved independent reading books, and games. Technology is infused through the use of laptop computers and will increase as the 1:1 laptop program is augmented. Students will receive training in typing to bridge the technology gap and increase computer literacy. Other resources that are used are teacher created PowerPoint and SMART Notebook presentations, video clips, books on tapes, sentence stems, word walls, chart paper mini-lessons and access to various websites, such as NewsELA, Read Write Think, Starfall, National Geographic for Kids, Enchanted Learning, Scholastic, Edhelper, and others. This range of materials is used with each ELL subgroup as needed. ENL services and resources are age and grade appropriate since the ENL curriculum is aligned with the content area curricula. Content area teachers have access to Google Translate to support ELLs a supplementary support, but utilize scaffolds created by the ENL service provider and the additional support of paraprofessionals. In addition to the above each classroom is equipped with SMARTboards.The content area instructional materials used to support ELLs are standard based aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Home language materials include but are not limited to translators, dictionaries, phrasebooks, bilingual libraries, teacher-created resources, and various tests in the myOn program, as well as texts purchased with NYSTL funding. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL, home language support is currently provided to Spanish speaking ELLs through the Spanish version of Achieve 3000, some translated materials, dual language bilingual books and worksheets, and isolated Spanish home language books. Where possible, first language glossaries are made available to ELLs. Staff members (including the Guidance Counselor, ENL, and Para Professional) are fluent in Hatitian Creole, French, and Spanish. These staff members provide translation and interpretation, and develop relationships with students as well as families to offer extra support to augment complete access to learning for ELLs and support inside and outside the classroom for the ENL community in its entirety. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Extensive time has been devoted to the common planning of all staff members to ensure that the required services and resources are aligned and used appropriately to support the age and grade level learning of ELLs. Resources are reviewed during team meetings which include adult specialists in all content areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used to support ELLs are composed of multi-level, multi-genred, and multi-grade tradebooks, textbooks across the content areas, teacher-created-differentiated materials, workbooks, test prep materials, reference books, and games. Technology is infused through the use of desktop and laptop computers, LCD projector, teacher created PowerPoint presentations, video clips, books on tapes, and access to various websites, such as Read Write Think, Starfall, National Geographic for Kids, Enchanted Learning, Scholastic, Edhelper, and others. This range of materials is used with each ELL subgroup as needed. ENL services and resources are age and grade appropriate since the ENL curriculum is aligned with the content area curricula. Content area teachers have access to Google Translate to support ELLs. In addition to the above each classroom is equipped with SMARTboards.MS588 shares a building with Kings Collegiate; however, they are a charter school with their own LAC and they currently have no ELL students. We collaborate as needed, but we only share a gym and cafeteria areas. A sign is at the front of the building to indicate that we have Language Access Services available. The content area instructional materials used to support ELLs are standard based aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Native language materials include but are not limited to translators, dictionaries and various tests in the myOn program, as well as texts purchased with NYSTL funding. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the school year starts the guidance counselor, ENL teacher, and assistant principal look at the incoming population to identfy ELLs. The NYSITELL can start being administered as of July 15th and will be administered, as mandated, by a certified ENL teacher, as part of the identification process. This in conjuction with the NYSESLAT scores released in August provides a broad scope of who the ELL population will be for the upcoming school year. Letters are sent out to their families to welcome 2018-19 CEP 58  them to our community and explain the program we offer. These letters are sent out in English and their native language. ELL students are afforded the same access to orientation programs when the school conducts them. A separate ENL parent orientation is organized to inform and refresh all LEP and ELL parents of their rights and, for new ENL parents, an additional ENL parent orientation is organized to show the ENL orientation video for parents to choose the language program best suited to their ELL child's needs within the first 10 days of a new L being admitted to the program. Children are invited to attend both orientations. Furthermore, ENL students will be engaged in a variety of programs such as world movie nights, showcasing films from their home countries, home culture fairs, engaging students from the entire school community in their customs and foods, and game nights, working in conjunction with Sports and Arts. Currently ENL students are encouraged to attend the 21st century after school program to facilitate stronger language acquisition skills and extend the classroom beyond the typical school day. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None. The school is currently searching for an appropriately licensed F-Status teacher to teach Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? MS 588 does not offer a Transitional Bilingual Program or Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development at MS 588 is provided by school staff and anticipated BFSC and District personnel: In the beginning of the year, administrators provide all teachers and professionals with lists of ELL students in their classes and strategies to address their learning needs. Teachers are encouraged to celebrate the progress of ELL students through classroom bulletin boards. All teachers also collaborate to analyze and evaluate the progress of their ELL students and strategize for next steps. Administrators provide additional support in the form of feedback through formal and informal conferences. Our PD schedule is constantly changing, but this year we are focused on consistency across classrooms. Two areas specific to ELL students and addressing their needs are a focus on think time and creating a space for multiculturalism in the classroom. The ENL teacher provides supports to all staff members in targeting ELLs individual learning needs. Accumulative hours of profession development include but are not limited to: study groups focused on specific shared texts, lesson and unit studies, the creation and implemention of research based strategies, weekly interdisciplinary and department meetings as well as a block of time for common planning to evaluate student work for the week and to plan for the following one based on student needs. These are based on common core standards as is all instruction at our school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Principal's ENL Liaison turnkeys information to school staff, including paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and parent coordinator. Teacher attendance at professional development sessions are recorded by their signatures and maintained in the professional development binder located in the Principal's office The school is currently developing the structures to ensure compliance in this area. Currently, all professional learning agendas and attendance documents are maintained in the Principal's office. There have been efforts to develop a Professional Development drawer with materials from all PDs in the 2018-19 CEP 59  main office, including ELL focused PDs. The professional development activities for this year are centered around consistency in curriculum norms across classrooms. Teachers within different disciplines receive requests to attend subject focused ENL workshops throughout the school year as well. Some of these topics have been centered around language objectives in Math and differentiating reading for ENL students. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the school year, MS588 provides meetings for parents focused on instructional issues, such as assessment, standards, promotional policies, and strategies for them to support students' academic progress. As part of our effort to strengthen the parental involvement, some members of our school community are bilingual and are committed to ensure communication between the school and the home. When these individuals are unavailable, MS588 uses the NYCDOE translation team. Weekly and/or biweekly emails are sent out detailing ENL news and parents are called weekly, or as needed, noting their child's status. This year, progress reports were distributed that aligned with the NYSESLAT rubric so parents could understand their child's level and areas in which progress is needed. ELL parents are also engaged in discussions about how to bring English into the home to foster bilingualism and academic success for their child. By 2019, a biweekly parents meeting for ELL parents will be established during which the ENL teacher will hold open office hours for parents to express their concerns or to check in on their child's advancements. This will be in addition to parent-contact time on the phone or by email and the ENL newsletters. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents regularly attend PTA meetings as well as workshops that are offered for parent engagement. The ENL teacher actively works with the parent coordinator and this upcoming year, there will be specific events geared towards the ELL parents. The workshop schedule changes annually, but there will be activities that include the ELL parents and the children as the program grows. Some of the potential workshops for this year are Legal Literacy, High School Search with an ENL and Bilingual Focus, and Diversity. It is anticipated in advance, following the home language surveys of the parents, if ENL parents would need translation, so that translators will be available if needed. Furthermore, parents are also asked if translation services are needed. Parents are provided with the parent's bill of rights, school correspondence, and school specific welcome brochures detailing specific calendar events and policies in their home language. ENL parents, who have provided their email addresses, receive weekly and biweekly ENL news correspondence from the ENL teacher, detailing progress their child has made in their ENL program, as well s in their core subject classes, the upcoming important dates, and a reminder of how to contact the ENL teacher with any questions or comments for further support. ENL parents are called for notifications of behavior issues, but are also called to benchmark successes and celebrations of their child[ren]. The school's Parent Coordinator has utilized funds to purchase parent guides in multiple languages, provides parents with direct support utilizing other staff members and the DOE translation line, for their interpretation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. It is important to note that with the hiring of an ENL teacher in January 2017, there has been a restructuring of ENL services. Many changes will begin with the start of the 2017-2018 school year, as mid-year schedule changes did not fully accommodate establishing the new program as a whole. Onboarding 6th graders and Newcomers to K588 will not only rely on the buddy system, but will receive a thorough orientation of ENL and basic classroom rules and organizational skills. Parent outreach is also increasing with the start of the new school year to include ENL driven activities for parents, in addition to the parent workshops. Finally, an increased approach to biliteracy with aid in the preparation for the goal of the seal of biliteracy when graduating from high school 2018-19 CEP 60  2018-19 CEP 61 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Neil McNeill Jr, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 62  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Middle School for Art and Phil School DBN: 18K588 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Neil McNeill, Jr. Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Camille Sealy Parent Coordinator Jessica Juliana Fischer-Smith ENL/Bilingual Teacher Andria Barry Parent Grace Benjamin/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Brickey Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Lea Denis School Counselor Beverly Wilkins Sourette Fougere Nina Perchenok Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Services Provider - SETSS Jessica Brickey Other Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 9/28/17 2018-19 CEP 63  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K588 School Name: Middle School for Art and Philosoph Superintendent: B. Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jessica Juliana Fischer-Smith Teacher YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Utilizing information contained in the home language survey, initial interviews with parents when students are registered, ATS and discussions at large with parents, the school has ascertained the preferred language of communication for parents whose native language may be one other than English. When parents enter the school building for any occasion, they are also asked which language they prefer if they appear to be LEP and we attain the proper translation services. Student emergency contact cards also contain the information. All ongoing correspondence throughout the school year is sent home in the requested home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 64  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Haitian-Creole Arabic - 258 14 9 3 - 90.53 4.91 3.16 1.05 - 258 14 9 3 - 90.53 4.91 3.16 1.05 - 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families The school distributes all letters home to students translated into their home language. Throughout the school year Field Trip Permission slips Throughout the school year Parent workshop correspondence/ reminders Throughout the school year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. This includes letters home to parents, the student handbook, announcements and fliers, calendars and any memo required to be sent home from central offices. In house translation or given to central pending on who is available in the building In house translation or given to central pending on who is available in the building Parent bill of rights Throughout the school year Copies are pre- translated by DOE 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences September 2017, November 2017, March 2018, May 2018 staff members, DOE representatives for interpretation as needed 2018-19 CEP 65  Parent workshops Monthly/ bimonthly starting October 16 School wide memos Weekly School Curriculum Night September 2017 Sports and Arts Nights Four times per year Field Trips Sporadically staff members, DOE representatives for interpretation as needed staff members, DOE representatives for interpretation as needed staff members, DOE representatives for interpretation as needed staff members, DOE representatives for interpretation as needed staff members, DOE representatives for interpretation as needed 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, all parents are notified on the remind app in addition to phone calls by the parent coordinator and teachers. All multilingual staff members would be made available. A few members of the school police forces also are multilingual and could assist in an emergency. Finally, for emergencies that are not as severe, if translation is not available in the school, the city translation services would be utilized. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the start of the school year, Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 will be an item on the meeting’s agenda, before students have entered the building. All staff members will be briefed on the Regulation to ensure coherency. This ensures that any and all staff members that are interacting with parents will do so in the regulatory fashion. Furthermore, the LAP team will be available to enforce and remind professionals of the regulation. In the main office of our building, we have Parent’s Guide to Language Access brochures. Our staff and parent coordinator all work together to ensure that all parents that require interpretation and translation receive it using staff members that speak their home language, the DOE translation phone team, and the DOE in person team. Additionally, staff members will be available to interpret at the PTA meetings and other key school events. In addition to the review of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, staff members will biannually revisit how to access all translation and interpretation resources. For further clarification, all staff members can also frequently ask any questions to the LAC or Parent Coordinator about how to ensure Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 is being upheld. Finally staff members are turn-keyed on how to access the language and interpretation line to ensure all staff members can contact any LEP to guarantee access to key information about a child's performance in our building. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 CEP 66   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) During registration and at the start of the school year, each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services are provided with a translated copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Posted in the atria area there is a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. The school's safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Parents who are enrolling their students in ENL are also informed of their rights during the orientation video. Finally parents will be receiving a Know Your Rights parent workshop. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will continue to speak with parents to get their feedback throughout the school year. In addition to these conversations, we have a survey in the home languages to ensure that parents are receiving the support and service that they need so that we can make adjustments as necessary. By 2019, an after school language program will be available for LEP parents provided by the ENL teacher. 2018-19 CEP 67 
