2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 13K605 School Name: GEORGE WESTINGHOUSE CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION HIGH SCHOOL Principal: JOE ARZUAGA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: George Westinghouse HS 331300011605 School Number (DBN): 13K605 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9 - 12 School Address: 105 Tech Place, Brooklyn NY 11201 Phone Number: 718-625-6130 Joe Arzuaga School Contact Person: Fax: 718-596-9434 jarzuaga@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 13 Joe Arzuaga Jennifer Gorman-Stokes EdlynCharles Md Sheik Chelsea Warren N/A District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110, Brooklyn, NY 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: FSC: 94 718-455-4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 CEP 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3954 Phone Number: (718) 935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Joe Arzuaga Jennifer GormanStokes EdlynCharles Ana Colon Cathy Faria Md Sheik Chelsea Warren Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/UFT 2018-19 CEP 5  DidiRamkisoon JaniceBux VasilisPsoras Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/CSA Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our community continues to focus on students’ academic, social and emotional health and growth; the professional growth of all members of the staff, and the creation of a culture and tone that reflect true collaboration, genuine support and inclusion of all members of the school community. These three components capture the vision for George Westinghouse. Therefore our mission is to ensure that every member of the staff works together to meet the needs of all students. Our goal is to encourage and enable every student to graduate on time with viable college and career options. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In an effort to ensure that we stay true to our vision and mission, school leaders have partnered with educational consultants and community based organizations that will support our consistent efforts. We strive to provide all members of our community with the tools required to engage all learners. For example, in an effort to ensure that our students are college and career ready, we have partnered with: New York City College of Technology Monroe College Alfred State College Pace Upward Bound Bottom Line Brooklyn College Educational Talent Search Program Long Island University St. Jospeh's College Medgar Evers College Advanced Placement for All Algebra for All College Access for All For guidance in industry we have partnered with: C-CAP Futures and Options Transit Workers Union Scholars at Work MTA Construction Skills 2018-19 CEP 10  Metro Tech BID Division of School Foods Con Edison We will continue to provide differentiated professional learning opportunities for our teachers’ professional learning and growth. e will identify a research based instructional writing strategy for our teachers' use across classrooms. Our professional learning team, comprised of teachers, an assistant principal and educational consultant, will continue to collect data through surveys and as reported in Advance to identify topics that will support teacher growth. We identified a research based instructional writing strategy Right to Write for our teachers' to use across classrooms in the 9th grade. Our community’s professional growth is supported by our focus on Teacher Collaboration and use of distributed leadership. This is evident in our teaming structures which include: Grade Teams, Content Teams and School Improvement Teams. All teams are run by a teacher leader who is supported by an administrator and educational consultants. The teacher leaders comprise what we refer to as our Design Team. We are open to sharing our effective practices with colleagues from other schools; we will also participate in the District Charter Collaborative . In a whole school approach to address students’ social and emotional learning and to build relationships, we will continue to implement a Restorative Practice approach. This work will be supported by a teacher coordinator, social worker, a Restorative Practice team and an educational consultant. We will expand our work in the 2018-2019 school year by using a continuum ranging from informal to formal practices such as restorative language with all members of the school community. Also, proactive circles will be used to build relationships amongst staff and students and to build social and emotional skills, responsive circles will be used when issues arise that need to be addressed and restorative meetings, conferences and re-entry circles when harm is done and repair is needed. Finally, in a cognizant effort to address community and environmental mindfulness will be made by all. Our school’s strengths include:  A significant cohort of staff is willing and able to implement meaningful change to improve student outcomes  and school tone. School leaders believe in teacher leadership and invite them to play an integral part of the decision making process.  We coordinate our school improvement efforts and grade teams through Design Teams that meet bi-weekly. We continue to look for ways to improve our student outcomes and college/career readiness in multiple ways, including (1) our school’s Instructional Focus and School Wide Practices, coordinated by our Professional Learning Team, (2) coaching by outside coaching partners to support instruction in all content areas, and (3) our expanding College Now Program with New York City Technical College (4) participating in Algebra for All, AP for All and College Access for All.  We have been working explicitly on building trust among all constituents of our community and have been tracking the growth of trust for three years, with an expectation that we will continue to track it.  We are open to sharing our effective practices with colleagues from other schools through the District Charter Collaborative Program.  A blend of academic and social/emotional course offerings meets students’ needs: academic intervention services, honors and advanced placement.  Grade and Content Teams are tracking student data meaningfully and conducting action research into best instructional practices, including teacher inter-visit processes and lesson study practices. 2018-19 CEP 11   We will continue to implement the practice of Restorative Justice that includes staff and students who have been trained in this conflict resolution strategy. We remain committed to making progress in all goals, and we continue to use research-based strategies and professional protocols in our decision making processes. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special populations include students with disabilities (SWD) and English Language Learners (ELL). Our SWD students are mostly in integrated co-teaching classes, and we have made significant progress in ensuring that they are provided with a balance of rigorous instruction with academic supports. This was accomplished by hiring teachers who are dually licensed and ensure that all staff understand the learning supports that required for this population of students. Our ELL students also receive these supports as a direct result of teachers' professional learning and collaboration. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school’s areas for growth include:  The need to build a consistent use of the Restorative Practices in our school community.  The need for a more consistent and strategic alignment between the grading policy and instructional plans.  The need for a more strategic use of data to inform instructional planning and school wide decisions.  The need to build on our current outreach programs to increase parental engagement, which will help develop an identified trust deficit area and promote student achievement.  The need for an increase in student-centered activities in instructional planning.  The need for more teachers to provide feedback that is aligned to a rubric, actionable and time bound. The area in which we have the made most progress has been in our work under Collaborative teachers. The following has been accomplished:  We have a high number of teacher leaders who run grade, content and school improvement teams.  We completed our three year partnership with the Learning Partners Program, and will continue this work with this school year with our acceptance into the District Charter Collaborative.  We have a strong Professional Learning Team that meets regularly to identify areas of support for their colleagues which will lead to improved student outcomes.  We have a larger cohort of staff who volunteered to be trained in Restorative Practices and who will collaborate with student support staff. 2018-19 CEP 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 13K605 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 756 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 51 55 1 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 49 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 75.3% % Reduced Lunch 2.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 20.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 62% 71.4% 4.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 77 71 24 88.3% 4.4% 20.2% 70.6% 4.5% 2.4% 8 12% 5.8 N/A N/A 73% 75% 85.8% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Strengths:  Across classrooms, there is consistency in instructional strategies with the use of multiple entry points, modifications for students with the use of organizers and groupings. (1.2 Quality Review, 2018)  Resources are aligned to strengthen and expand the GWHS CTE programs. (1.3 Principal Performance Review, 2018)  George Westinghouse has increased the use of technology to support student engagement through blended learning and strong development of digital literacy. (1.3 Principal Performance Review, 2018)  Resources are allocated to support student success academically, socially and emotionally, as well as the CTE component. (1.3 Principal Performance Review, 2018) School Needs:  During the lesson, there needs to be a better use of student discussions and discourse. (1.2 Quality Review, 2018) Focus on the use of rubrics to provide students with actionable feedback. (2.2 Quality Review, 2018)   While parents are positive about George Westinghouse High School, they did not indicate they were actual partners with the school. Parents need to articulate how they use information from the school to support their child. (3.4 Quality Review 2018)  The outcomes for team inquiries need to be evident across grade and content teams. The impact is about mastery of goals to increase the achievement for all students. (4.2 Quality Review, 2018) In summary, teachers need additional support in integrating technology to support rigorous activities that will result in students' intellectual engagement as evident through students' creation of higher order thinking questions and discourse. To increase integration of technology across classrooms we have partnered with a consultant to develop an action plan for blended learning at George Westinghouse High School (GWHS). Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP 14  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In June 2019, with an integrated approach to the use of technology in all content areas, scholarship data in all classes will increase by 5% as compared to the 2017 -2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Professional development, as provided by an educational Teachers Sept. 2018  consultant school and teacher leaders, will be provided to teachers on how to use an integrated approach to technology in their lessons. In order to provide an integrated approach to technology to foster student generated questions and discourse, teacher teams in content and grade will focus on designing coherent instruction to improve student outcomes.  Teachers will collaborate in weekly content teams in  student work protocols to adjust curriculum and instructional decisions based on identified student gaps. Learning walks will be scheduled twice per term for teachers to observe the use of technology in the classroom as a means to engage students in productive discourse. Per-session and per-diem funds will be used as needed to allow for the teacher to teacher pre and post conversations. School teams will use this data to review and revise their planning. through June, 2019  Implementation of a Mous/Digital Citizenship course for 9th grade students. Teachers and Sept 2018 – June 2019 School leaders and educational consultants. School leaders, teacher leaders and teachers. School leaders, teacher leaders and teachers. Students Parents  Tech nights will take place in the fall to deepen parents’ understanding of the CCLS and the ways in which rigorous curricula prepares students for college and careers. October 2018 – June 2018 School leaders, educational consultants, and teachers. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 16  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Tech nights will take place in the fall to deepen parents’ understanding of the use of technology in education and the ways the proper use of technology prepares students for college and careers. The use of an online grading system, ioEducation, a Westinghouse.org G-mail account and access to the school website will provide parents with ongoing information. Time line: September 2018 - June 2019; key personnel: Principal, school leaders, grade team leaders, student leaders and guidance counselors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – educational consultants; 10 teacher leaders (6 content and 4 grade); two assistant principals; the principal. Instructional Resources – Exemplars of units/lessons that uses technology to engage students in questioning and discussion. Schedule adjustments – per-session funds for additional time for team meetings and curriculum design workshops; coverage time for teachers to conduct inter-visitations; calendar of workshops for parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Learning walks will be scheduled twice per term for teachers to observe the use of technology as a vehicle to engage students in productive discourse.Per-session and per-diem funds will be used as needed to allow for teacher to teacher pre and post conversations. School leaders will also observe teachers and collect data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) STARS reports, IO Gradebook, formative and summative assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School Strengths:  Resources are allocated to support student success academically, socially and emotionally, as well as the CTE component. (1.3 Principal Performance Review, 2018)  50% of our staff are trained in restorative practices.  During the 2017-2018 school year, our school has participated in the RULER approach to Social Emotional Learning  There are currently five staff members trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Service. These staff members have volunteered to provide services to both teachers and students on an as needed basis.  We have two full time deans to assist with conflict resolution in addition to the restorative justice coordinator and the restorative justice social worker.  We are implementing a ladder of referral intervention program which will look at school suspensions as a last resort.  Consistent communication of high expectations for staff, on Danielson, the use of a GWHS Faculty Handbook, PD calendar, teacher teaming and the development of their mutual accountability. (3.4, Quality Review 2018) Students prepare for their next level with guidance and support for College and Career Readiness and CTE options. (3.4 Quality Review, 2018)   A digital Citizenship course will be offered to all 9th grade students for social media and online awareness. A parent course will be offered to parents via our school website.  An advisory program will be offered to all 9th grade students once a week at the end of their instructional day. School Needs:  Additional staff trained in restorative circles as well as Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Strategies.  Focus on the use of the RULER approach as well as restorative practices to the staff members who are new to the school community.  While parents are positive about George Westinghouse High School, they did not indicate they were actual partners with the school. Parents need to articulate how they use information from the school to support their child. (3.4 Quality Review 2018 Summary 2018-19 CEP 18   In summary, Restorative Practice has provided us with the language and protocols to repair harm, restore positive relationships and resolve conflict to hold individuals and groups accountable for their actions using the power of positivity. However, we are not there yet. We need 100% buy-in from our staff, students and parents. As we continue to develop our understanding of Restorative Practice and Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (PBIS), which recognizes students who make appropriate choices and provides social and emotional support for those who struggle, we believe suspension rates will continue to decrease. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. There will be a 5% decline in principal suspensions as compared to the 2017 -2018 school year. 2018-19 CEP 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  A GWHS freshman advisory program to help students cross the bridge from middle to high school and to lay the foundation for the keys to success in meeting schoolwide academic, social, and civic expectations.  Students and staff will consistently engage in circles where we address school-related issues that are relevant to our school community and support the mission and vision of George Westinghouse High School.  Continue to implement our PBIS initiative. GWHS staff reward students when they are meeting expectations and making the right choices academically and socially. We connect specific benefits with proper behavior and "reward" the right thing with a G-House buck. Our students can use their rewards at our G-House store to purchase school supplies, movie tickets, sports gear, etc. Every month a "Do the Right Thing" student raffle will be held to reinforce positivity throughout our school community.  We will participate in the District-Charter Collaborative, which is designed to facilitate collaboration between district and charter schools with the goal of improving instructional practices and student outcomes while building schools’ capacity to solve their problems of practice. To improve student outcomes, our Learning Focus Area (LFA) this year is Restorative Practice.  A series of workshops will be offered to parents in recognizing and supporting strategies to combat Cyberbullying. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Students September 2018 – June 2019 School leaders, teachers, students, guidance counselors, parent coordinator, Social Workers Teachers, guidance counselors, deans, social workers, school leaders, school aides and students Teachers, Social Workers, School leaders September 2018 – May 2019 School leaders, teachers, Social Worker, parent coordinator N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP 20  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A series of workshops will be offered to parents in recognizing and supporting strategies to combat Cyberbullying. We will also post relevant resources on our school website to further inform the parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - School leader, guidance staff, Restorative Justice team, Deans, Administrators, school leaders, grade team leaders and parent coordinator. Instructional Resources - Digital Citizenship curricula Schedule Adjustments – Schedule for advisory lessons, parent grade level meetings. Per session funds for additional time for advisory program, team meetings and professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A review of monthly OORS suspension reports will reflect a 5% decrease as compared to school year 2017-2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS suspension reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school had a Central Led review on February 23, 2016 and the following recommendations were identified:  Continue to build school capacity by refining Lead Teacher roles that support effective instruction.  Continue to direct teacher teams to further advance the development of students’ higher-order thinking skills. School Strengths:  Across classrooms, there is consistency in instructional strategies with the use of multiple entry points, modifications for students with the use of organizers and groupings. (1.2 Quality Review, 2018)  Assessment data is used to adjust curricula and instruction (1.1 - Quality Review 2018)  The school has a highly structured teaming structure in place. (1.2 PPO Review - Spring 2018)  Curricula is available on GoogleDrive for all content areas. Teacher share curriculum maps, units and lessons. There is a four day cross-curricular unit and lesson planning institute over the summer where teachers receive professional learning on a deeper understanding of the backwards planning process. (1.1 - PPO Review Spring 2018)  Across classrooms, there is consistency in instructional strategies with the use of multiple entry points, modifications for students with the use of organizers and groupings. (1.2 Quality Review, 2018) School Needs:  Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels (Indicator 2.2 - Quality review 2018)  Create a tracking system to assess student mastery (Indicator 1.1 - Quality review 2018)  The outcomes for team inquiries need to be evident across grade and content teams. The impact is about mastery of goals to increase the achievement for all students. (4.2 Quality Review, 2018)  Teachers need to be more consistent in their use of formative and summative assessment data to inform  instructional planning. (MoTP data, 2015 - 2016) Students must receive consistent feedback as to their next steps in order to reach their academic potential. (MoTP data, 2015 - 2016) Summary Teacher teams are embedded in our school community. The next step is a consistent use of data to ensure that teaching strategies provide multiple pathways to accelerated learning for all students. 2018-19 CEP 22  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In June 2019, as a result of departmental, grade level intervention tasks, the CCR indexes for both the ELA/Math Regents will increase by 10% as compared to June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Summer planning will enable teachers to identify the literacy and numeracy skills required for students’ readiness for college and careers. These skills will be vertically aligned, and an implementation calendar will be developed.  Develop a "school-wide" process for using standardized test data and other assessment results to create a clear picture of student progress toward goals across grades and subjects, to track progress and to guide interventions and adjust curricula so that all students, including SWDs and ELLS, demonstrate progress toward mastery. An assessment calendar will be developed.  The Grade and content teams will reflect, review and revise units of study using student work and assessments, and develop intervention strategies for addressing the weakness (es).  The Professional Learning Team, consultants, and administrators will provide protocols, PD and ongoing guidance for collaborative analysis of assessment data.  Content teams will reflect, review and revise units of study using student work to inform next steps for students with disabilities, English language learners and other high-need student subgroups.  After school support classes, will be offered to provide additional help for students in high-need subgroups.  Parents will be invited to culminating student celebrations. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams August 2018 – May 2019 Principal, assistant principals, data specialist and educational consultants Content Teams October 2018 – May 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teacher leaders and educational consultants. Parents, teacher teams, students October 2018 – May 2019 Principal, assistant principals, data specialist, teacher leaders and educational consultants. 2018-19 CEP 24    Parents have access to yearlong curricula go-to maps and syllabi to develop an informed understanding of students’ learning and course expectations. School leaders will provide parents with an understanding of what collaborative teachers looks like at our school. Details regarding team goals and action plans will be discussed. Intentional collaboration between content teachers and school staff who are responsible for career development will be ongoing. Incoming 9th-grade students identified as most at risk of not meeting the ELA and/or math standards, are enrolled in our summer math and ELA GWHS, Summer Bridge program, to provide students with additional learning time and support. Students, Teachers, Administrators July 2018 - May 2019 Teachers., Administrators, Guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator  Provide Academic Intervention Services in the following courses: Algebra, ELA, US History and Living Environment as a supplement to regular classroom instruction designed to help students achieve the New York State Learning Standards.  After school support classes, will be offered to provide additional help for students in high-need subgroups. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents have access to yearlong curricula go-to maps in order to develop a deeper understanding of students’ learning and course expectations. Timeline: September 2018 - June 2019; key personnel: Principal, school leaders, educational consultants, grade and content team leaders and guidance counselors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Content and grade team teachers leaders and teachers, guided by Principal, Assistant Principals, educational consultants and the PL team; teachers for extended learning opportunities. Instructional Resources - Curricula; data templates; analysis protocols; school wide grading policy. Schedule Adjustments – per-session funds for additional time for team meetings; coverage time for teachers to conduct inter-visitations and after school academic support classes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2018-19 CEP 25  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A review of January 2018 Regents results as compared to January 2017 Regents results will indicate a 5% increase of scores that meet the CCR indexes in ELA and math Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS reports, Parent Surveys, Parent/Teacher home visit logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school had a Central Led review on February 23, 2016 and a Quality Review on April 11, 2018 and the following recommendations were identified:  Highly effective and effective teacher plans that incorporate challenging prompts to promote student discourse in all learners during classroom observations. (MoTP, 2017 - 2018)   Students need to provide textual evidence to enhance student to student discourse. (2017-2018 School Quality Guide) In summary, teachers' plans must include learning activities that engage students in questioning and discussion. Rubrics and checklists must be embedded so that teachers can provide their students with actionable feedback. School Strengths:  Consistent communication of high expectations for staff, on Danielson (3.4 Quality Review, 2018)  Teacher teams and school leaders have a process for adapting curriculum that aims to improve individual  and subgroup achievement. Teacher teams collaborate regularly. (4.2a - Central-Led Review, 2016) School leaders and teacher teams have effectively implemented systems to monitor student data and classroom practices. Students are actively engaged in learning activities across grades and subject areas. (4.2b - Central-Led Review, 2016) School Needs:  Highly effective and effective teacher plans that incorporate challenging prompts to promote student   discourse in all learners during classroom observations. (MoTP, 2017 - 2018) Students need to provide textual evidence to enhance student to student discourse. (2017-2018 School Quality Guide) In summary, teachers' plans must include learning activities that engage students in questioning and discussion. Rubrics and checklists must be embedded so that teachers can provide their students with actionable feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 CEP 27  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Frequent cycles of observation and purposeful feedback by school leaders and guided professional development to support effective instructional practices will result in a 5% increase in the overall teacher MoTP ratings in assessment in instruction as evidenced in the Danielson rating of 3d(Using assessment in instruction) by June 2019 as compared to June 2018. 2018-19 CEP 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will conduct a minimum of 2 department walk-throughs with each Assistant Principal throughout the 2018 -2019 school year. The walk-throughs will allow supervisors to discuss instructional patterns and identify professional development needs. All teachers October 2018 – May 2019 Principal, assistant principals, educational consultants. First-year teachers will work with an educational consultant and their mentor to receive continuous and non-evaluative support. Content team leaders will be supported by school leaders and educational consultants in the use of data to inform the next steps in designing instructional plans at bi-monthly meetings. Scheduled Instructional Rounds to provide teachers with non-evaluative feedback.  Teachers will participate in weekly collaborative planning by the department to plan lessons with strategically embedded assessment strategies and rubrics. Teacher teams will analyze the student work product to assess the value of the activity and inform next steps. Content teams; ENL and special education teachers. October 2017 – May 2018 Principal, assistant principals and educational consultants. 2018-19 CEP 29  Teacher teams will scaffold strategies to promote student engagement in order to meet the needs of all students.  Parents will be informed of trends in instructional and Parents assessment data at PTA and SLT meetings.  Parents will be invited to honor roll ceremonies that celebrate student achievement. October 2017 – May 2018 Principal, assistant principal and educational consultants. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of trends in instructional and assessment data at PTA and SLT meetings. Parents will be invited to honor roll ceremonies that celebrate student achievement. Timeline: October 2017 - June 2018; key personnel: Principal, school leaders, and educational consultants. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Content, Grade and SIT Teams, with assistance from consultants and the administrative staff. Instructional Resources – Educational consultants; professional development on writing strategy. Schedule Adjustments - Common planning for content teams; per-session for after school professional learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers' advance rating in 3d will indicate a 2.5% increase in January 2019 as compared to January 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP 30  Advance teacher rating system; Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school had a Central Led review on February 23, 2016 and the following recommendations were identified:  Parents want additional proactive measures of intervention for struggling students. Parents want increased robust communication about programs offered by the school between the school community and families. (3.4b) School Strengths:  Parents/guardians agree that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. (2017 -2018 School Quality Guide) In summary, the school has numerous ways of communicating with families that we established to ensure success for all students. To increase parental involvement, as evidenced by responses to the School Quality Guide, we will provide parents with opportunities to volunteer and participate as active members in our school community to ensure our students are on track for college and career readiness. School Needs Parent response to “parent involvement in school to volunteer time to support the school” had a 49% positive response rate. (2017 -2018 School Quality Guide) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Strong parent communication by staff to families will result in a 10% increase in parents responding to the 2018 - 2019 NYC DOE Parent Survey as compared to the 2017 - 2018 results. 2018-19 CEP 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Parent-Teacher home visits - initially 20 students from each grade level will be targeted.  At the start of the 2018 -2019 school year, school staff will contact parent/guardians with a friendly welcome back message to foster open, comfortable communication systems and mutual respect.  Outline specific ways for parents/guardians to help at school. and at school to draw parents into the learning environment. From inviting parents to watch group presentations to asking them to chaperon field trips, a direct call for volunteers  A school generated survey will be given to parents/guardians to elicit topics for workshops and discussions that are relevant to their lives.  Translated materials will be prepared in English language learners’ native languages. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students and Parents October 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, and teachers Students and parents. October 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, parent coordinator, guidance counselor and translation unit. Invite parents/guardians to a Student Academic Showcase, so they can see what their student is learning first hand. Students, families Grade level parent meetings will focus on grade-specific post-secondary planning for all students. October 2018 – June 2019 Principal, assistant principals, teachers, guidance counselors, and parent coordinator. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. C-CAP; Futures and Options; Transit Workers Union; Scholars at Work; MTA; Construction Skills; Metro Tech BID; 2018-19 CEP 33  Division of School Foods, and Con Edison Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources – Grade Teams, college access for all team, school leaders, WBL learning coordinator, parent coordinator and guidance counselors. Instructional Resources – Translation services Schedule Adjustments - Common planning for content teams; per-session for after school professional learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent participation at school events, such as the PTA meetings, will reflect an overall increase of more 5% for January 2019 as compared to January 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Focused parent meetings; school generated parent surveys and data from home visits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in the 9th grade will receiveacademic intervention services through a targeted approach to writing in English Language Arts courses. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The purpose of this AISapproach is to provide students with additional supportin acquiring the necessary reading and writing skills to pass the ELA Regents. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before, during and after the school day. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) A researchbased curriculum will be used in whole class and small group settings. Mathematics Students who have not passed theELA Regents will be scheduled for after school support classes to close the achievement gap. All 9th grade students receive the AIS mathematics course unless they have taken and passed the Algebra Regents (some students take the course and exam in 8th grade). This allows for the math teacher of the non-AIS course to provide students with rigorous and standard based instruction that does All ninth grade students are programmed for a Math AIS class during the school day. The purpose of this AIS course is to provide students with additional supporting in acquiring the necessary math skills to both pass the Algebra Regents and be successful as they take higher level math courses. Additional class programmed in schedule. During the school day. 2018-19 CEP 35  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) not have to be tied to test preparation, as might be the case if the AIS course was not offered. Historical Algebra Regents passing rates and trends led the school to adopt this AIS model. 10th grade students who have not yet passed the Living Environment and US History Regents will be scheduled for an AISclass to support their learning and to provide additional support in passing the regents. Tenth Grade Students who have not passed theUS History Regents will be scheduled for an AISclass during school to close the achievement gap. Students who have not yet passed a Global Regents exam will be scheduled for an intervention support class after school to close the achievement gap. At-risk students will receive additional support by guidance staff as well as SBSTand other supportpersonnel to ensure that they are successful in school. Thespecific AIS course has been created for students in science and US History to focus on students who have not yet passed the Living Environment and US History Regents. The purpose of this AISapproach is to provide students with targeted interventions. Additional class programmed in schedule. During the school day. One-to-one, small group, and large group depending on service. During or after school day. The school has several programs/staff available to provide at-risk services: One-to-one, small group, and large group depending on service During the school day. The school has a social worker on site Monday through Thursday as part of the RAPP (Relationship Abuse 2018-19 CEP 36  Prevention Program) Program. The RAPP counselor works with students in grades 9 through 12 who are experiencing issues with relationship abuse (sexual, physical, verbal and emotional abuse), domestic violence and other relationship concerns/issues. The RAPP counselor provides individual and group counseling. Currently, the school psychologist primarily works with those students requiring three year reviews, but there have been several re-evaluations and initial evaluations performed this year for those students identified by parents or staff as being in an inadequate placement. The social worker who works with the school psychologist as part of the SBST team, counsels students are receiving “at risk” counseling services. The related services social worker provides counseling for those students whose IEPs indicate mandated counseling. The school nurse sees students with a range of medical 2018-19 CEP 37  conditions including asthma, diabetes, allergies, anaphylactic, ileostomy care, migraines, heart murmurs and sickle cell anemia. In addition, the nurse runs a Healthy Options Program (HOP) for those students who are obese. 2018-19 CEP 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 39 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. One to one/small group counseling and supplies that will support success in school. STH students will be selected for after school programs that help them with their work and prepare them for Regents. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 40  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. School leaders attend hiring fairs and hire teachers with experience; there is a high priority placed on teachers who are dually licensed in content and special education. To every extent possible, teachers are given assignments that are in their content area and reflect their preferences in terms of upper or lower grades. Potential hires are asked to conduct demonstration lessons in order to ensure the quality of their teaching. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are provided with professional learning opportunities that are embedded into our school day. There is also a calendar of after school professional learning workshops available. Teachers are provided with opportunities to lead teams and make decisions that impact our school, including participation in the hiring process. Specifically, teacher leaders will identify pedagogical strategies that will support students toward meeting state standards. Model teachers will assist their colleagues in incorporating them into their practice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2018-19 CEP 41  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school's Professional Learning Team will collaborate with school leaders to ensure that we are meeting the needs of teachers. In addition, all Grade and Content Teams are led by teachers, and school leaders will meet with them twice per month to identify additional needs based on assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal $465,164 X X X 2018-19 CEP 42 Column B Section Reference(s) Rigorous Instruction; collaborative teachers, family and community engagement, and supportive schools.  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local X $5,597,686 X Rigorous Instruction; collaborative teachers, family and community engagement, and supportive schools. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-2018-19 CEP 43  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Title I Parent Involvement Policy George Westinghouse High School will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement plan (contained in the RDCEP/DCEP Addendum) under Section 1112 – Local Educational Agency Plans of the ESSA: School Leadership Team will include discussion of Title 1, Part A parent involvement policy and will be an active participant in discussion of the development of the Title 1 parent involvement policy. Parent Association meetings will include discussion of Title 1, Part A parent involvement policy. Parent feedback will be used to identify parent workshops and events that will lead to higher levels of parent involvement and engagement. George Westinghouse High School will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under Section 116 – Academic Assessment and Local Educational Agency and School Improvement of ESSA: School Leadership Team will conduct a PASS review to help all students in Title 1, Part A programs to meet the challenges of the Common Core and State Standards. 2018-19 CEP 45  Parent feedback forms will be provided to teachers in an effort to promote a meaningful dialogue that will lead to deeper understanding of the Common Core and State Standards. George Westinghouse High School will coordinate and integrate parental involvement/engagement strategies in Title I, Part A with parental involvement/engagement strategies under the other programs:  Annual Title 1 Parent Awareness Night  Annual Title 1 Parent Conference Day  Parent/Teacher Conferences  College Readiness Workshops  Pupil Path Trainings  Understanding the Common Core Workshops  On-going individual parent meetings George Westinghouse High School will conduct an annual evaluation, with the involvement of parents, to determine the effectiveness of the parental involvement policy in an effort to improve the quality of its Title I Part A program. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary the parental involvement policies. George Westinghouse High School will build the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement and engagement, in order to ensure parents’ participation in programs, workshops and events designed to support a partnership aimed at increasing students’ academic success. Specifically the school will conduct: Parent Conferences and/or workshops: The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph 1. Common Core and New York State Standards; 2. Diploma Requirements including New York State Regents Exams; 3. The requirements of Title I, Part A; 4. How to monitor their child’s progress; and 5. How to communicate with educators and work toward supporting students’ success. 2018-19 CEP 46  George Westinghouse High School will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve academic achievement in the areas of literacy, technology, math in a variety of settings. SAT review books, Barron’s Review books, binders with loose leaf will be provided to parents. Also included are after school parent conferences, the use of the parent coordinator’s office, guidance offices and departmental offices. The school will foster a warm and supportive atmosphere. George Westinghouse High School will, with the assistance of the district and parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principals and other staff in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools by: The school will provide professional development opportunities for staff to improve communication techniques when dealing with parents and community for the purpose of enhancing students’ chances for success. Parents will be offered opportunities to evaluate individual and group conferences in a continuing effort to make improvements. An ongoing dialogue with the PTA committee and other pertinent personnel will take place as well. George Westinghouse High School will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Relationship Abuse Prevention Program, Dancing Classrooms, and public programs and conduct and/or encourage participation in activities, such as Parent Resource Centers, that support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: Guidance personnel will monitor the students in their caseloads who are on home bound or hospital bound instruction. They will communicate with parents on a regular basis, and they will do the necessary paperwork to update students’ records. This also includes any student who is a part of a school for pregnant teens as well. George Westinghouse High School will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings and other activities, is sent to parents of Title I participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand: 2018-19 CEP 47  Parents are afforded the opportunity to participate in conferences with an interpreter should they require one. Several forms are available in Spanish which is the major alternate language of the students in our school. Adoption This School Parental Involvement Policy and the School Parent Compact has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by the attendance sheets at PTA meetings and PAC meetings. This policy will be adopted by George Westinghouse High School at the November PTA meeting and will be in effect for the period of one year. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I Part A children on or before December 3, 2018. This Parent Involvement Policy (including the School-Parent Compact) will be distributed for review by the Principal on November 8, 2018 at the PTA meeting for review. The final version of this document will be distributed to the school community on December 3, 2018 and will be available on file in the Parent Coordinator’s office. A copy of the final version of this policy will also be submitted to the Office of School Improvement as an attachment to the school’s SCEP and filed with the Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy. Principal’s Signature: Joe Arzuaga Date: June 30, 2018 Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students George Westinghouse High School will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of the District Parental Involvement plan (contained in the RDCEP/DCEP Addendum) under Section 1112 – Local Educational Agency Plans of the ESSA: 2018-19 CEP 48   School Leadership Team will include discussion of Title 1, Part A parent involvement policy and will be an active participant in discussion of the development of the Title 1 parent involvement policy.  Parent Association meetings will include discussion of Title 1, Part A parent involvement policy. Parent feedback will be used to identify parent workshops and events that will lead to higher levels of parent involvement and engagement. School Leadership Team will conduct a PASS review, in an instructionally useful manner, to help all students in Title 1, Part A programs to meet the challenges of the Common Core and State Standards.   Parent feedback forms will be provided to teachers in an effort to promote a meaningful dialogue that will lead to deeper understanding of the Common Core and State Standards.  George Westinghouse High School will coordinate and integrate parental involvement/engagement strategies in Title I, Part A with parental involvement/engagement strategies under the other programs: 1. Annual Title 1 Parent Awareness Night 2. Annual Title 1 Parent Conference Day 3. Parent/Teacher Conferences 4. College Readiness Workshops 5. Pupil Path Trainings Understanding the Common Core Workshops 6. On-going individual parent meetings 7. George Westinghouse High School will conduct an annual evaluation, with the involvement of parents, to determine the effectiveness of the parental involvement policy in an effort to improve the quality of its Title I Part A program. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary the parental involvement policies. Parental Involvement and School Quality George Westinghouse High School will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Relationship Abuse Prevention Program, Dancing Classrooms, and public programs and conduct and/or encourage participation in activities, such as Parent Resource Centers, that support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: Guidance personnel will monitor the students in their caseloads who are on home bound or hospital bound instruction. They will communicate with parents on a regular basis, and they will do the necessary paperwork to update students’ records. This also includes any student who is a part of a school for pregnant teens as well. Parents are afforded the opportunity to participate in conferences with an interpreter should they require one. Several forms are available in Spanish which is the major alternate language of the students in our school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement George Westinghouse High School will build the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement and engagement, in order to ensure parents’ participation in programs, workshops and events designed to support a partnership aimed at increasing students’ academic success. Specifically the school will conduct: Parent Conferences and/or workshops 2018-19 CEP 49  The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph 1. Common Core and New York State Standards; 2. Diploma Requirements including New York State Regents Exams; 3. The requirements of Title I, Part A; 4. How to monitor their child’s progress; and 5. How to communicate with educators and work toward supporting students’ success. George Westinghouse High School will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Relationship Abuse Prevention Program, Dancing Classrooms, and public programs and conduct and/or encourage participation in activities, such as Parent Resource Centers, that support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: Guidance personnel will monitor the students in their caseloads who are on home bound or hospital bound instruction. They will communicate with parents on a regular basis, and they will do the necessary paperwork to update students’ records. This also includes any student who is a part of a school for pregnant teens as well. Parents are afforded the opportunity to participate in conferences with an interpreter should they require one. Several forms are available in Spanish which is the major alternate language of the students in our school. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School Parent Compact September 6, 2018 School Responsibilities George Westinghouse High School will: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: All students will receive a rigorous academic and technical program. Academic interventions will be integrated into the student’s school day as well as in our after school program. Students’ progress will be monitored by guidance staff, teachers and all those who interact with them on a daily basis. They will be encouraged to meet or exceed 2018-19 CEP 50  expectations. Parents will be welcomed into our school, and there will be ongoing communication in an effort to provide support, encouragement and a celebration of success. Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: September 26th, November 29th and 30th 2018 (Fall Semester) March 7th & 8th, May 9th 2019 (Spring Semester) In addition to the two parent/teacher conference dates that are scheduled as indicated above, evening parent conferences will be held each term to provide parents with an additional opportunity to meet with guidance staff, school administrators, social workers and teachers. Progress reports will be used as an additional communication tool during the school year. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: School Report cards, student report cards, SKEDULA; in house progress cards are available for parents throughout the term. In addition, our school messenger system is utilized to send out daily messages to parents of absentee students and messages about special meetings. Mailings with regard to Promotion in Doubt are mailed out as well. Parent Association meetings which are held once per month are also attended by various staff members who provide meaningful information to the parents who attend. Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Communication is on-going at George Westinghouse High School. Parents are contacted by phone and mailings by teachers and support staff throughout the school year. Messages about their child’s progress as well as the emotional and social development are addressed by these various forms of communication. Individual conferences are an option throughout the school year whereby teachers and support staff are available by appointment. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows: Parents are encouraged to participate in their child’s education by attending Report Card Conferences four times per year to review students’ report card grades. They are always welcome to volunteer in our school library as well. They are also invited to attend school wide events that are designed to either address concerns or celebrate success. Parent volunteers are welcomed through our Parent Coordinator’s office as well as through the individual contacts that are made by teachers and support staff. Parent Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP 51  We as parents will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by: talking with my child about his/her activities every day; scheduling daily homework time; o making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school; o monitoring attendance; o o o providing an environment conducive for study; o making sure that home is completed; o monitoring the amount of television my children watch;  participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education;  participating in school activities on a regular basis;  staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding as appropriate; reading together with my child every day;   providing my child with a library card;  communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility;  respecting the cultural differences of others;  helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior;  being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district;  supporting the school’s discipline policy;  expressing high expectation and offer praise and encouragement for achievement.) PART II – OPTIONAL ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS Student Responsibilities: We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  come to school every day and be ready to do our best and be the best;  come to school with all the necessary tools of learning – pens, pencils, books, a book bag, etc. 2018-19 CEP 52   listen and follow directions;  participate in class discussions and activities;  be honest and respect the rights of others;  follow the school’s/class’ rules of conduct;  ask for help when we don’t understand;  complete all assignments on time;  study for exams;  read at least 40 minutes every day outside of school  get adequate rest, eat well and exercise  give our parents/guardians, all notices and information we receive at school every day. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum George Westinghouse High School will: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: All students will receive a rigorous academic and technical program. Academic interventions will be integrated into the student’s school day as well as in our after school program. Students’ progress will be monitored by guidance staff, teachers and all those who interact with them on a daily basis. They will be encouraged to meet or exceed expectations. Parents will be welcomed into our school, and there will be ongoing communication in an effort to provide support, encouragement and a celebration of success. Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: September 26th, November 29th and 30th 2018 (Fall Semester) March 7th & 8th, May 9th 2019 (Spring Semester) In addition to the four parent/teacher conference dates that are scheduled as indicated above, evening parent conferences will be held each term to provide parents with an additional opportunity to meet with guidance staff, 2018-19 CEP 53  school administrators, social workers and teachers. Progress reports will be used as an additional communication tool during the school year. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: September 26th, November 29th and 30th 2018 (Fall Semester) March 7th & 8th, May 9th 2019 (Spring Semester) In addition to the four parent/teacher conference dates that are scheduled as indicated above, evening parent conferences will be held each term to provide parents with an additional opportunity to meet with guidance staff, school administrators, social workers and teachers. Progress reports will be used as an additional communication tool during the school year. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: School Report cards, student report cards, SKEDULA; in house progress cards are available for parents throughout the term. In addition, our school messenger system is utilized to send out daily messages to parents of absentee students and messages about special meetings. Mailings with regard to Promotion in Doubt are mailed out as well. Parent Association meetings which are held once per month are also attended by various staff members who provide meaningful information to the parents who attend. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Communication is on-going at George Westinghouse High School. Parents are contacted by phone and mailings by teachers and support staff throughout the school year. Messages about their child’s progress as well as the emotional and social development are addressed by these various forms of communication. Individual conferences are an option throughout the school year whereby teachers and support staff are available by appointment. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows: Parents are encouraged to participate in their child’s education by attending Report Card Conferences four times per year to review students’ report card grades. They are always welcome to volunteer in our school library as well. They are also invited to attend school wide events that are designed to either address concerns or celebrate success. Parent volunteers are welcomed through our Parent Coordinator’s office as well as through the individual contacts that are made by teachers and support staff. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held: September 26th, November 29th and 30th 2018 (Fall Semester) 2018-19 CEP 54  March 7th & 8th, May 9th 2019 (Spring Semester) In addition to the four parent/teacher conference dates that are scheduled as indicated above, evening parent conferences will be held each term to provide parents with an additional opportunity to meet with guidance staff, school administrators, social workers and teachers. Progress reports will be used as an additional communication tool during the school year. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: School Report cards, student report cards, SKEDULA; in house progress cards are available for parents throughout the term. In addition, our school messenger system is utilized to send out daily messages to parents of absentee students and messages about special meetings. Mailings with regard to Promotion in Doubt are mailed out as well. Parent Association meetings which are held once per month are also attended by various staff members who provide meaningful information to the parents who attend. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities as follows: Parents are encouraged to participate in their child’s education by attending Report Card Conferences four times per year to review students’ report card grades. They are always welcome to volunteer in our school library as well. They are also invited to attend school wide events that are designed to either address concerns or celebrate success. Parent volunteers are welcomed through our Parent Coordinator’s office as well as through the individual contacts that are made by teachers and support staff. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Parent Responsibilities We as parents will support our children’s learning in the following ways: supporting my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by: talking with my child about his/her activities every day; scheduling daily homework time;   making sure my child is on time and prepared everyday for school;  monitoring attendance;    providing an environment conducive for study;  making sure that home is completed;  monitoring the amount of television my children watch;  participating in school activities on a regular basis;  staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding as appropriate; reading together with my child every day;   providing my child with a library card;   communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work and responsibility; respecting the cultural differences of others; 2018-19 CEP 55  helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior;  being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the school and district;   expressing high expectation and offer praise and encouragement for achievement.)  supporting the school’s discipline policy; Informing the school when there is a change to my contact information including but not limited to phone numbers, addresses and emergency contacts.  participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  come to school every day and be ready to do our best and be the best;  come to school with all the necessary tools of learning – pens, pencils, books, a book bag, etc.  listen and follow directions;  participate in class discussions and activities;  be honest and respect the rights of others;  follow the school’s/class’ rules of conduct;  ask for help when we don’t understand;  complete all assignments on time;  study for exams;  read at least 40 minutes every day outside of school  get adequate rest, eat well and exercise  give our parents/guardians, all notices and information we receive at school every day. 2018-19 CEP 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 13 School Name George Westinghouse High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 605 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joe Arzuaga Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jenna Hurley / Victoria Eisman Teacher/Subject Area Inna Huber - English Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Jovana DeLeon Superintendent Janice Ross Assistant Principal Nick Pillari Coach n/a School Counselor Kevin Hernandez Parent Marcia Comas Parent Coordinator Carolette Rouse Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 788 2018-19 CEP 57 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 3 4 2 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use teacher-created assessments or old NYSESLAT exams to assess early literacy skills. If available, we also use the NYS ELA 8th grade exam and spring NYSESLAT scores to gauge literacy skills of incoming 9th grade students. Students in grades 10 through 12 have been assessed previously on the NYSESLAT. Data on current students indicate that all students scored at Level 1 or 2 prior to entering high school. This data combined with the information obtained from the NYSESLAT data (described below) show that a more intense focus on reading and writing skills is required in ENL classes, with less of a focus on listening and speaking skills. The ENL teacher is implementing more reading and writing activities in class to support development of these modalities. Some of these interventions include annotating text, DEAR (Drop Everything and Read) and Think, Write, Pair, Share. In addition, since this data seems to be consistent with school wide literacy needs of non-ELL students, ELL students in content area classes are also benefiting from our school wide instructional focus on literacy that hones in on improving reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. 2018-19 CEP 58  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? A team of teachers have been attending professional development workshops about implementing researched based writing strategies across all content areas. This team is responsible for obtaining new information and relaying this information to the rest of the teaching staff. When developing curriculum, all content area teachers will be accountable for developing tasks that utilize these interdisciplinary literacy strategies. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is evaluated in several ways. We analyze the number of students who improve their scores or score at a level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT. We also look at student scholarship data to determine credit accrual and progress toward graduation. We also evaluate student progress on standardized tests (Regents, etc.) to determine students making AYP. The biggest hurdle for all ELLs does seem to be Regents exams, as can be seen with the low number of students achieving passing grades. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The data is disseminated to Grade and Content Teams in order for teachers to adjust instruction to meet the needs of all ENL students to ensure their progress. Grade and content teams meet every Monday and Tuesday to discuss and analyze student progress based on benchmark and summative data. The newly created data team will provide disaggregated data from formal assessments such as regents exams and NYSESLAT score reports. Teachers will develop targeted interventions based on the data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT and English Regents are outcome assessments we use to evaluate and inform ELL students of their English language proficiency progress. We have assessed two students using the NYSITELL.Data on current students indicate that the majority of students have met or are very close to reaching English-language proficiency in listening and speaking, but results are varied for reading and writing. The data shows the need for more interventions focused on more reading and writing for older students who have not yet progressed in their evaluation of their English language acquisition on the NYSESLAT and on the English Regents exam. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Administration and teachers regularly analyze data from assessments in order to make adjustments to our ELL program and determine any necessary interventions that are appropriate for individual students' needs. This is done on an individual and case by case basis. We analyze the number of students who improve their scores or score at a level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT. We also look at student scholarship data to determine credit accrual and progress toward graduation. We also evaluate student progress on standardized tests (Regents, etc.) to determine students making AYP. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP 59  a. Freestanding ENL program. 1) Integrated ENL instruction seeks to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher to students who require the service. In our Freestanding ENL program, we utilize the push-in model. Classes are heterogeneous and are serviced by a teacher licensed in TESOL and Spanish. Integrated ENL instruction seeks to build English language skills through content are instruction. It is delivered through co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Students are programmed by grade level to be in the same required core class and the ENL teacher is assigned to the class for the number of days necessary to meet the required instructional minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each core course is taught in 45 minutes periods each day. The ENL teacher is programmed to be in the classroom for the required number of minutes that each student requires. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English is the language of instruction for all classes and multiple tests are used as well as other media. Classes focus on the four essential modalities of reading writing, listening and speaking and the curriculum is aligned with both ELA and Language Progressions for ENL and Bilingual students. Learning strategies are aligned to the NYS learning standards. Techniques include the CALLA approach, differentiated instruction, balanced literacy scaffolds for ELLs and project-based authentic language learning activities. Students receive language-to-language dictionaries and content area glossaries for use in classes and during high stakes testing. The school complies with all time and location mandates for testing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENL classes are taught in and students are tested in English. Students have access to word -to-word translation dictionaries and native language dictionaries 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The ENL teacher uses various data from ATS and STARS to determine the performance of the student(s) before coming to high school. Parental communication usually yields more specific information about the causes and the extent of the interruption to the child's education. Various classroom assessments are then used to determine areas of weakness and the student's language and instructional needs. Instruction is differentiated to meet these needs. Traditional ELL supports are provided (language to language dictionaries/glossaries, instructional strategies such as modeling, bridging prior and new knowledge, schema building, etc., vocabulary development, rubrics that help students determine their own progress and proficiency) and further assessments are given. Progress is measured against baseline data and instruction is modified as needed. In addition, these students can participate in school wide tutoring and assistance sessions when offered. b. As with SIFE, the ENL teacher uses various data from ATS and STARS to determine the performance of the student(s) before coming to high school if available. Various classroom assessments are then used to determine areas of weakness and the 2018-19 CEP 60  student's language and instructional needs. Instruction is differentiated to the extent possible to try to meet these needs. Traditional ELL supports are provided (language to language dictionaries/glossaries, instructional strategies such as modeling, bridging prior and new knowledge, schema building, etc., vocabulary development, rubrics that help students determine their own progress and proficiency) and further assessments are given. Progress is measured against baseline data and instruction is modified as needed.In addition, these students can participate in school wide tutoring and assistance sessions when offered. Traditionally, George Westinghouse high school has not had a large number of newcomers. c. Students who have received 4 to 6 years of service, are provided with the level of ENL instruction needed, and as with previously mentioned students are researched and assessed. For students in this category, more emphasis is placed on determining areas of weakness on the NYSESLAT and what English language acquisition issues remain that are impeding the student from testing out or what academic deficiencies are present that are preventing the student from testing out. For these students sometimes additional guidance is needed from the content areas teachers to determine difficulties the student is having. Instruction is differentiated to provide these students with academic support and/or NYSESLAT preparation. In addition, these students can participate in school wide tutoring and assistance sessions when offered. d. Students who have received more than 6 years of service, are provided with the level of ENL instruction needed, and as with previously mentioned students are researched and assessed. For students in this category, more emphasis is placed on determining areas of weakness on the NYSESLAT and what English language acquisition issues remain that are impeding the student from testing out or what academic deficiencies are present that are preventing the student from testing out. For these students sometimes additional guidance is needed from the content areas teachers to determine difficulties the student is having. Instruction is differentiated to provide these students with academic support and/or NYSESLAT preparation. In addition, these students can participate in school wide tutoring and assistance sessions when offered. Students in this category may sometimes benefit from intervention from the guidance counselor, as they no longer feel that they should be in ENL and their attendance begins to worsen. Guidance intervention can sometimes assist in these situations. 6e. The ENL teacher monitors progress of former ELLs and ensures that ELLs receive testing accommodations as needed on Regents examinations. These often include time extension, separate location, third reading of listening selection on ELA Regents, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries and simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher uses direct instruction as well as cross-curricular content-area projects. Students work in small groups to allow stronger students to assist weaker ones in indirect teaching and self-learning. A content-area based textbook and workbook series is utilized in the classroom as well. For those students who are ELL-SWDs, the Assistant Principal of Student Support Services ensures that in addition to ENL services, students are provided with the recommended services that are listed on the IEPs of ELL students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular materials are chosen to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs or curricular materials are differentiated to allow ELL-SWDs access to the curriculum. Class sizes are extremely small, allowing for extensive personalized attention for each student, which is particularly useful for ELL-SWDs. In regard to other classes, students are scheduled according to their IEP mandates but mainstreaming occurs in our technology, PE, arts and foreign language courses. Student progress in each content area is reviewed to determine if students require different educational placements. These decisions are made in conjunction with the content area teachers, and flexible programming is implemented as needed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Due to the limited number of ELLs, specific interventions are not targeted at them. These students receive the same targeted intervention strategies that are offered to non-ELL students. These services include credit-recovery opportunities using an online system and Saturday Regents preparation classes. These students also receive AIS courses during their day to acquire skills and prepare for various Regents exams. Ninth grade students receive this course in Algebra. Tenth grade students receive 2018-19 CEP 61  this course in Global History. Eleventh grade students receive this course in English Language Arts. All services are provided in English. The ENL teacher is in regular contact with parents and content-area teachers to address the specific needs of ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are exploring providing more push in based models since it assists with students in language acquisition 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Student's ability to have a schedule similar to their peers that allows them to participate in school events and activities is taken in to consideration when scheduling ENL classes. ELLs participate fully in all school programs. They have full access to the CTE programs we offer (Multimedia Internet Technology, Electrical Installation and Practice, Culinary Arts and Computer Systems Support). ELLs can participate in all offered PSAL sports teams. In addition, a variety of clubs exist (National Honor Society, FIRST Robotics, Chess Club, Martial Arts Club, Anime Club, NYC Explorer Club, International Trip Club and Creative Arts Club). Currently the school is offering after school Regents tutoring and Saturday school classes, in which all ELLs can participate. In addition, ELLs can take advantage of the after school library hours that are being offered throughout the week. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. iPads are used to support reading comprehension development. Many texts, content-area glossaries, language dictionaries, classroom reading libraries, field trips, as well as media such as film, audio CDs and tapes, computers and Internet sites are used. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All instruction is in English, however, the LEP/ENL Coordinator, Jenna Hurley, does speak fluent Spanish if needed. Within the classroom, students are encouraged to use resources such as Google Translate to translate words into and from their home language. Translators are available for parent meetings, letters, IEP meetings, etc., and glossaries and native language dictionaries are provided to students for in-school and at-home usage. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. At the high school level, ages and grade levels are close enough that students can work together in meaningful ways. That being said, materials are differentiated by age/grade level if needed. Texts are also chosen to meet students' interests and are chosen so that they are relevant to perhaps other classes they are taking. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Administration and teachers currently meet informally to share resources and coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ academic,linguistic, and socioemotional needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school conducts orientations for newly enrolled students, including ELL students, prior to the start of the school year, at which such topics as state standards, assessments, school expectations, and student programs are addressed. The principal and assistant principals of each academic discipline address the students and their parents at these orientations and are available to discuss their concerns As needed, translators are made available. Additionally, a summer school Bridge program is offered to all incoming freshmen, including ELLs. 2018-19 CEP 62  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, ELLs are only offered to take Spanish as a Foreign Language at George Westinghouse High School. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to ensure that all students meet the rigorous new standards and pass all Regents examinations, the ENL teacher will be sent to all region-wide/city-wide professional development sessions available, including DOE PDs. Information will be shared in professional development sessions with English Language Arts teachers and content area teachers. The ENL teacher will also work in tandem with content area and special education teachers and assistant principals to explore best practices in teaching and learning for ENLs. These meetings will be both informally structured as the need arises and formally structured during department meetings throughout the year. ELL news is communicated in school newsletters. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. During the 3 Chancellor's professional development conferences on November 6, 2018, January 28, 2019, and June 6, 2019, teachers will be provided professional development in best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. The school conducts orientations for newly enrolled students and their parents, including ELL students, at which such topics as state standards, assessments, school expectations, and student programs are addressed. The principal and assistant principals of each academic discipline address the students and their parents at these orientations and are available to discuss their concerns. As needed, translators are made available and literature is provided in the home language wherever possible. Furthermore, the ENL teacher along with content area teachers routinely contact parents to provide them with updates on the progress of their children. Progress letters are sent to inform parents about the problems and/or successes their child may be experiencing. Letters are also sent to the students’ homes to inform parents of upcoming events, such as Parent/Teacher Interviews. To the extent possible, these letters are sent both in English and in the parents’ native language. Individual meetings with parents and ENL students' progress with the respective student's guidance counselor.. If needed, translators are made available for these meetings. 2018-19 CEP 63  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are often present at Parent/Teacher Conferences and during open school nights. ELL parents are often offered translation services are available for all parent-focused activities. A number of ELL and former ELL parents attended the Parent Appreciation Night this May 2019. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 CEP 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joe Arzuaga, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: George Westinghouse High Schoo School DBN: 13K605 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joe Arzuaga Title Principal Nick Pillari Assistant Principal Carolette Rouse Parent Coordinator Jenna Hurley ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marcia Comas Parent Inna Huber/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jenna Hurley/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kevin Hernandez School Counselor Janice Ross Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/3/19 6/3/19 6/3/19 6/3/19 6/3/19 1/1/01 1/1/01 6/3/19 6/3/19 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 13K605 School Name: George Westinghouse High School Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nick Pillari Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The RPOB report that is generated in ATS enables us to identify those students whose home language is not English and therefore provide both written and oral translation/interpretation services to them and their families as needed. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 67  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral An analysis of our interpretation needs reveals that 85% of our parents communicate in English. The second largest language group is Spanish which comprises 7.5% of our parent population. The third largest group is Haitian-Creole speaking parents who comprise 2.5% of our parent population. When necessary, documents and messages are translated in to these languages by staff and outside translators. The school community is informed at faculty meetings, PTA meetings and SLT meetings of the various languages spoken by our parents and the consistent availability of translation and interpretation services. N/A N/A N/A ARAUCANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CROATIAN FRENCH HAITIAN CREOLE INDONESIAN (AKA BAHASA) ENGLISH POLISH PORTUGUESE RUSSIAN SPANISH URDU 9% 36% 11.6% 36% 9% 18% 12.5% 9% 87.30% 9% 9% 9% 85.9% 27% ARAUCANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CROATIAN FRENCH HAITIAN CREOLE INDONESIAN (AKA BAHASA) ENGLISH POLISH PORTUGUESE RUSSIAN SPANISH URDU 9% 36% 11.6% 18% 9% 18% 13.4% 9% 86.85% 9% 9% 9% 88.6% 27% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP 68  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome back to school letter September 2017 Parent Teacher conference invitations September 2017, November 2017, March 2018, May 2018 Student progress letters October 2017 - May 2018 Student promotion in doubt letters January 2018, June 2018 Summer school letters June 2018 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation services are provided through letters, fliers and announcements, which are translated into various languages (as identified in the RPOB report) and backpacked home. Using our phone message system, we inform parents/guardians of information in various languages. Messages are generally sent out multiple times on separate occasions to ensure that the calls have successfully reached our parents/guardians. In-house school staff provide assistance with written translation services when needed. September 2017 - June 2018 as needed. We subscribe to an online phone messaging system which transcribes messages into home language. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open school conferences September 2017 -May 2018 Face to Face meetings / telephone conferences September 2017 - June 2018 interpretation service(s)? Oral interpretation services that the school will provide take place on Open School Evening and Open School Day (Parent-Teacher Conferences) Bilingual staff is available to provide this service at those times or as needed during the school day or after school. We have many native Spanish, Haitian-Creole, Russian, and Arabic speakers within our school community. We have been utilizing the DOE sponsored translation service via 2018-19 CEP 69  N/A N/A telephone conferences with parents and guardians. N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School messenger system can transcribe emergency phone calls, text messages and emails to the parents and guardians of limited-English-proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our opening day faculty meeting, all staff is presented with the Chancellor's regulations including A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations - A663 by: 1) Using our phone message system to notify parents/guardians of important school related issued, dates (ex: Regents exams, mid-term exams, PTA meetings, etc.) etc. 2) Being certain that signs are posted to inform parents/guardians that they will be able to receive translation services when they enter our building. 3) Utilizing the DOE website to obtain letters, that already exist, in foreign languages and re-print them on our school letterhead to be either mailed or backpacked home to parents/guardians. 4) Displaying the Parents' Bill of Rights in a conspicuous location in school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 70  Our school will gather informational feedback on translation using the parent survey and also but administering our own school-specific survey through our ENL coordinator. 2018-19 CEP 71 
