2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K617 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR INNOVATION IN ADVERTISING AND MEDIA Principal: ADALEZA MICHELENA 2018-19 CEP 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information HIGH SCHOOL FOR INNOVATION IN ADVERTISING AND MEDIA 331800011617 9-12 School Number (DBN): 18K617 1600 ROCKAWAY PARKWAY, BROOKLYN, NY 11236 7182908760 Phone Number: 7182908766 Fax: JAMIE WEYERBACHER JWEYERBACHER@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: ADALEZA MICHELENA ANTHONY FUSARI na JAMIE WEYERBACHER SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): na CBO Representative: Mischael Cetoute District Information Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: RICHARD CINTRON Superintendent: 335 ADAMS STREET, 5TH FLOOR, BROOKLYN, NY, 11201 rcintron@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 3  Brooklyn FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: AlexandraAnormaliza 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5265 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 CEP 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AdalezaMichelena Anthony Fusari TBD na na *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Jamie Weyerbacher Member/Assistant Principal ZennebeArnold Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 CEP 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer DeGennaro Member/ Teacher JoyettaGordan Denise Bailey KaiDeSouszaHoward Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 CEP 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 CEP 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement 2018-19 CEP 8  Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the High School for Innovation in Advertising and Media (HSIAM) is to provide academic and career competencies that will transform students into competitive candidates for future endeavors in college and career pathways. The school, providing a rigorous and real-world experience-based learning environment through the lens of advertising and media, will afford students transferable skills that make them highly qualified for a multitude of industries. Ultimately, the school’s educational mission will empower students to make well-informed decisions about their educational and professional futures. 2018-19 CEP 9  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. HSIAM is a small school of under 300 students located on the Canarsie Educational Campus. HSIAM is a New York State Certified Career and Technical Education (CTE) high school that concentrates on advertising and media. Every student participates in this unique program sequence, which includes specialized CTE courses that terminate in certification exams, including Microsoft Office, Adobe Web, Photoshop and others. Students acquire 21st century skills through various components, including advertising based courses, certification of mastery of computer programs, work based learning, internships and core academic instruction. We are partnered with the 4A’s, the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the national trade association representing the advertising agency business in the United States. The 4A’s support our advertising program in several ways. They work with teachers to develop instruction that hones in on the skills needed in this competitive industry. They provide industry based experiences to students during their high school careers. They hold events and competitions that bring real corporate based advertising projects to our school. The 4A/s group also provides industry based opportunities, like Project Act, and scholarships for graduating seniors. This is our second year participating in the AP for All program. We now offer six advanced placement (AP) courses to students. We have over 30% of our student body enrolled in at least one AP course. We also have our entire 11th grade study body enrolled in both AP US History and AP English Language and Composition. Additionally, all students are registered for the exams that follow completion of the course. We are also going into our second year with the Restorative Justice (RJ) Program through the Center for Court Innovation. The Center for Court Innovation’s approach to restorative justice seeks to promote individual responsibility and participation, repair harm, and build relationships. Our RJ coordinator works with students to help them develop social emotional skills by using circles as a forum for students to listen, share, question, etc. Typically done during advisory periods, the RJ coordinator also hosts forums and events to create a culture of respect for self and respect for all. The RJ Program also works with staff and school families to help understand conflict and learn strategies for resolution. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 47 (19%) Special Education Students These students are mostly classified as learning disabled as per their IEPs. They required either an 15:1 setting (10 students) or an integrated Co-Taught setting. Three students have paraprofessionals. Many also have mandated counseling, speech and language services, occupational therapy. They all have testing modifications, mainly separate locations and extended time. 22 (9%) English Language Learners. These students range from beginning to commanding with respect to English Language proficiency. Students speak either Spanish (1), Arabic (8), French and/or Haitian Creole (13). We utilize botht he oush in/pull out model to attend to the varying levels of students. Our ENL teacher also works directly with teachers to help them develop modifications ot lessons to support ENL students. 178 (70%) Students in Poverty 2018-19 CEP 10  These students receive a range eof services in an effort to close the achievement gap. This includes additional instructional time at lunch, after school and on Saturdays. Students also receive supplemental materials like calculators and basic supplies. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous instruction is where we have made the most progress over the past year in terms of course offerings. We implemented a range of courses that were not only standards aligned, but also highly engaging in both the course topics and rigorous tasks. We joined the AP for All initiative and registered almost 30% of our student body in AP courses, including AP Statistics, AP Language and Composition and AP Environmental Science. 98% for these students sat for the subsequent AP exams. The teachers of these courses each spent at least 10 days during the school year at professional development. We also partnered with the Computer Science for All initiative and and created two sections of Science Engineering Principles. We enrolled 50 students in grades 10 and 11. This year, students worked on projects related to computer programming, robotics, web design, physical computing, and game design. They also participated in both a school based and city wide hackathon. The teachers of these courses spent at least 10 days during the school year at professional development. We continued our partnership with BUILD Enterprise and created two courses of the entrepreneurship program. Students were challenged to create a product, design it, market it, pitch it and sell it to the public with the goal of earning the most profit. This entire process was facilitated by the teacher, the BUILD program managers and current business professionals. Students were partnered with real business owners as their mentors for the year with weekly meetings. The teacher of this course was provided one on one coaching through the BUILD program manager. Our CTE curriculum was also reorganized to address the needs , interest and goals for our students. We reengaged with Douglas Davis, who helped us initially build this program when he school first opened. Together with the two teachers of the program, we revised the sequence of course and the goals within each one. Courses include introduction to advertising, graphic design, career and financial management and portfolio. A key area of focus for us this year is fostering a supportive environment. According to longitudinal survey results, positive ratings in this area continue to decrease, from a 2.99 in 2016 to a 2.19 in 2018. All responses to questions in this category were at least 9% below borough and/or city average. The rate of positive responses were all under 75%, with four measures' responses being less than 60% positive. 2018-19 CEP 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K617 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 255 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 11 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 29 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 65.9% % Reduced Lunch 8.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 13.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 74% 58% 62.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 62 59 17 83.7% 3.9% 19.2% 83.1% 0.4% 1.2% 4 9% 8 N/A N/A 85% 61% 81.8% 18% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP 12  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School's strengths: As for rigorous instruction, our academic program includes five Advanced Placement courses, a software engineering program, and an entrepreneurship course. Our CTE program features introduction to advertising, graphic design, web design, career and financial management, and digital portfolio. The 2017-18 survey results indicate an over 85% positive response rate from teachers to questions around having the resources to address the Common Core shifts in Literacy and Math. However, positive responses from both teachers and students decreased in regards to academic preparedness, course clarity and classroom discussion. This suggests that while teachers feel they have the resources, the classroom instruction itself needs to be addressed. This aligns to results of measures of Teacher Performance for this school year. Over half of our teachers continue to rate "developing" in both component 3b, questioning and discussion techniques, and 3d, using assessment in instruction. There are several priority needs. The first priority is get all of our students to pass their regents exams on the first attempt. This begins with a focus on classroom instruction to ensure that teaching practices across all classrooms foster student engagement as described in the Advanced Framework, Component 3c. Pedagogy must be rooted in rigor, real world application and student choice. Through engagement, our student can develop the skills and strategies they need to master challenging coursework. This would then result in an increased passing rate on Regents Exams. The second priority is to increase our graduation rate. Our graduation rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 58.5%, our lowest since our first cohort of graduates. We obsvered that studnets who did not graduate becuase they failed regents exams multiple times. To address this, we need studnets to pass exams on the first attempt. Beyond supplemental preparation, we are focused this year on to aligning our instructional curriculum to the culminating exams so that the work in the classroom reflects the standards measured by these Regents exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 CEP 13  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a passing rate of 75% or better on all NYS Regents exams. 2018-19 CEP 14  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implementation of Afterschool & Saturday Academy to provide supplemental instruction to students in preparation for Regents exams. Students Embedded prep courses into students' daytime course schedules. Students November 2018-Janaury 2018, April 2019 - June 2019 Spring 2019 Term Administration Administration Peer Collaborative Teacher will facilitate the vertical alignment of curriculum with content area teams. Meetings between administration and content teams to review and revise vertical alignment maps. The use of the observation-feedback cycles with teachers to view, discuss and develop best practices around student engagement. Teachers Ongoing Administration Teachers Ongoing Administration Teachers Ongoing Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the first parent teacher conference session, we will present our goals and action plan to families.. At Parent Association meetings, we will share updates towards meeting our goals. We will also discuss Regents exams and resources and strategies to help students prepare. Students and families will receive emails, phone messages and paper copies of regents prep, including daytime and supplemental supports. We will host a campus wide college fair, college information session and college financial aide night for families. These sessions will highlight academics, including graduation requirements, college entrance requirements, and resources to support students. Emails and phone messages will be sent out to families four weeks before each Regents administration with resources for their children to prepare for exams. 2018-19 CEP 15  Teachers will contact families during designated family engagement blocks to share student progress and support resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Use of a centrally funded Peer Collaborative teacher to facilitate the vertical alignment work. - Use of College Access for All money to fund college related activities like college information sessions. - Common planning time for grade teams for 45 minutes two times a week. - Common planning time for department teams for 45 minutes two times a week. - On site professional development provided by administration. - Scheduling of mock regents exams at least one month before actual exam administration windows. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of second (or more) time test takers will have passed their Regents exams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January 2019 Regents Exam Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We invest a great deal of time and resources to create a supportive envrionment for students. Through our partnership with the Center for Court Innovation, we implement a student advisory program based on Restorative Circle Practices. The Restorative Circle Coordinators also serve as a peer mediators, mentors and resource coordinators. This year, we have also added a peer mediation course where students learn how to mediate conflicts and offer these services to peers. As a school we also provide professional development for staff to learn how to support students at the social emotional level by teaching them about issues like trauma related PTSD and stratgies to address it. School Survey results from 2017-2018 indicate that over half of the students feel positively about the school as a supportive environment. We also celebrate student success at each marking period, acknowledging students who make honor roll, perfect attendance, improved attendance and students of the month. Our school does well will attendance monitoring through systems and structures, like double review of daily attendance by all school personnel and weekly confirmation of attendance by teachers. We also have attendance improvement initiatives including weekly perfect attendance announcement displays, monthly celebrations for perfect attendance and prizes for improvement of attendance. We also have structures for outreach, including phone calls home, letters home, home visits and school conferences. While our regular attendance rate is steady, most of our students with attendance issues attend school between 80-90% of the school year. if we can increase that number, then we can improve our overall rate. Yearly attendance data has shown little improvement over the past two years. 2015 - 2016, 86.5% 2016 - 2017, 86.4% 2017 - 2018, 83.74% Below is data from 2017-18 YTD: Official School RateAttd YTD: 2018-19 CEP 17  Active Students OnlyLess than 90% YTDSeverely Chronically Absent (Less than 80% YTD)Chronically Absent (80-90% YTD)At Risk (90-95% YTD)Not At Risk (95+% YTD)Lateness YTD# Students% Attd# Students% Attd# students% students# students% students# students% students# students% students# students% students# days% of yearTotal30283.70%25685%12448%5923%6525%5722%7529%3825% 2017 & older1255.48%569%360%360%00%240%00%1913%20185781.63%5384%2955%1121%1834%1019%1426%4126%20198682.98%7883%3849%2431%1418%1823%2228%4629%20207688.18%6490%2438%914%1523%1625%2438%3422%20215686.49%5686%3054%1221%1832%1120%1527%3424% 2018-19 CEP 18  Based on the above data, the priority need is to increase the attendance of students who currently fall into this 80 - 90% range. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP 19  By June 2019, 50% of the students in the 80-89% attendance interval will move to the 90 - 99% attendance interval as evidenced by attendance rate and the RYPA ATS report. 2018-19 CEP 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-weekly attendance team meetings comprised of administration, business manager, attendance teacher, guidance counselor, teachers, dean and school aides to: review RSAL, RCUA, discuss open cases, open new cases, close cases, arrange for home visits, share out critical information including information about 407s and subsequent outreach, as well as development of action plans. Students with less than 11% attendance in a 10 day period. Communication to homes to inform families when children are absent on a daily basis. Absent students Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Weekly mandated parent outreach by teachers to contact parents of both sporadic or chronically absent students. Late and/or absent students September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Teacher team leaders Collaboration with the school's centrally funded attendance teacher to work on outreach in the form of phone calls and home visits to investigate students who are identified as having patterns of absenteeism. Target Students Weekly check in with target students with school based mentor. Target Students Target Students Target Students Student Attendance Progress Board updated weekly Monthly celebration for attendance progress 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration School staff Administration Attendance Team September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, send a letter home to families of students with 80-89% attendance and describe plan for improvement. 2018-19 CEP 21  Invite families to the mid year evening celebration for students with improved attendance . Monthly, send progress letters home with students' exact attendance for the month. Utilize Family Welcome Center to host workshops on issues that affect student attendance, like housing. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Common meeting time with facilitation guidelines and expectations. ● Compensation for teacher work time beyond designated school hours. ● Flexible faculty lunch periods to support meeting between teachers and students. ● Pre-determined dates of meetings and physical meeting space . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 25% of students with 80-89% attendance will move into the 90-99% range. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance data reports from ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our teachers believe in collaboration. They spend a significant time working together on planning, assessment, student action plans, etc. Teachers have mandatory common planning time with both their grades and departments built into their schedules. Teachers also plan grade wide activities and initiatives to boost student morale. School Survey results from 2017-2018 indicate that teachers feel that collaboration is important and agree that it is an integral part of their work at the school as noted below: Innovation and Collective Responsibility 80%  Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction 88%   Peer Collaboration 77%  Quality of Professional Development 71%  School Commitment 69% Despite consistent collaboration, students are not earning enough credits to be on track for graduation according to the credit metrics from the 2016 - 2017 School Quality Guide. 1st Year Students - Percent of Students Earning 10+ Credits, 80.4% 2nd Year Students - Percent of Students Earning 10+ Credits, 54.8% Given the amount of collaboration among teachers, credit accumulation among 9th and 10th grade students should be much higher. In discussions about this, teachers agree that while they work together on immediate planning, they do not spend enough time with long range planning, like curriculum alignment. Currently, we do not have a vertically aligned curriculum that clearly states the skills of mastery for students at each grade level in each subject area that reflect advancement towards higher level courses and exams. Our priority need is for teachers to collaborate on developing a vertically aligned curriculum that shows a clear progression of student skills and content at each grade level and within each subject area. 2018-19 CEP 23  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of 9th graders will earn 10+ credits and 65% of 10th graders will earn 10+ credits as evidenced by the school's credit metrics. 2018-19 CEP 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Peer Collaborative teacher (PCT) will meet with content area teams to establish the work for the vertical alignment. Teacher teams The PCT will work with teams on a weekly/monthly basis to develop and revise the vertical alignment maps. The PCT will present on going work to administration to give feedback and provide next steps. Grade teams to select 10 under-credited students as their target populations and develop goals and actions plans for each student. Teacher teams Teacher Teams Teacher Teams Grade teams to review and revise work with target population to prepare for next set of students in Term 2. Teacher Teams Grade teams to select 10 under-credited students as their target populations and develop goals and actions plans for each student. Teacher Teams Grade teams to review and revise work with target population to inform next year's work. Teacher Teams Grade teams will meet once a week for 45 minutes to lay out the list of skills students should know at the end of each grade. Teacher Teams Department teams will meet once a week for 45 minutes to lay out the "ins and outs" (what students should know coming in and coming out of each course to be prepared for the next one.) Teacher Teams Administration September-October 2018 Ongoing Administration February 2019 October 2019 January 2019 February 2019 Administration Administration Administration Administration June 2019 Administration Ongoing Administration Ongoing Administration Grade and Content area teams will present their completed maps to staff for feedback. Teachers February 2019 Administration Grade and Content area teams will present their completed maps to staff for feedback. Teachers May 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At Parent Association meetings, we will share this plan and the progress being made. 2018-19 CEP 25  We will mail out/email/backpack resources for parents relative to academic support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teacher schedules with common meeting times. ● Use of designated professional work time afterschool as department team meeting time. ● Compensation for teacher work time beyond designated school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% of 9th graders will earn 5+ credits and 65% of 10th graders will earn 5+ credits as evidenced by the school's credit metrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credit Metrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017 -2018 School Survey results, leadership was rated favorably: Inclusive Leadership 98% Instructional Leadership 80%    Program Coherence 63%  Teacher Influence 70% However, this contrasts the Advance Measures of Teaching Practice Ratings from 2017 -2018, with the lowest average rating in being in Domain 3 - Classroom Instruction. While the support exists, the instructional practices do not show evidence of it. The priority need is to create a professional development program that uses the elements of the Advance Framework Domain 3 to drive the objectives of the program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% or more of teachers will score an average of 3 or higher for Domain 3 of the Advance Framework as evidenced by Advance reports. 2018-19 CEP 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams review PD plan and make suggestions. Teachers September/October 2018 Administration/Teachers Develop final PD plan - calendar, layout, activities Teachers October 2018 Administration/Teachers Schedule intervisitations for teachers to observe and reflect on practice Teachers November 2018 Administration Administer student survey around teacher instruction Students December 2018 Administration/Teachers Review student surveys teacher observation data and revise PD plan On going assessment of PD plan based on classroom observations Teachers January 2019 Administration/Teachers Teachers Ongoing Administration/Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At parent association meetings, administration will share the professional development program, focusing on how the objectives will impact student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Teacher schedules with common meeting times. - Use of designated professional work time afterschool as department team meeting time. 2018-19 CEP 28  - Compensation for teacher work time beyond designated school hours. - Flexible faculty lunch periods to support meeting between teachers and students. - Pre-determined dates of meetings and physical meeting space. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 50% of Advance teacher ratings will be effective and/or highly effective in Domain 3, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teacher Effectiveness Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017 - 2018 School Survey shows favorable ratings from families:  Outreach to Parents - 90% positive response  Parent Involvement in School - 86% positive response  Parent Principal Trust - 94% positive response  Parent Teacher Trust - 94% positive response However, these high ratings do not reflect the voices of all of our families. In examining survey response rates, they have never been about 15%, and have declined over the past three years:  2016, 11%  2017, 8%  2018, 7% Because these results do not account for all of our students, the survey does not serve as a data tool for improvement in strong family and community ties. We also struggle with getting more than 50% of families in the school for meetings and events. Not having a strong data set limits us in making adjustments to our family involvement efforts. We hope that the increase in family attendance will help render an increase in credit accumulation, attendance, regents pass rates, and graduation rates. If families can collaborate with schools, they can better support their children by understanding their goals and having tools to help them reach their goals. Our priority need is to increase the amount of families who complete the school survey so that we have enough data to determine how we can engage more families in our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 50% of families will complete the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 2018-19 CEP 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development session for teachers on communicating with families. Mail/backpack letters about the school survey to families. Create event around school survey completion by holding a raffle and offering refreshments during parent teacher conferences. Expand the school website to have a pop up link to the school survey for families. Hold tri annual student celebrations for progress and performance and invite families to attend. Use electronic sign in sheets to aggregate data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018 Administration, PD Committee Families Families Ongoing Administration Spring 2019 Administration, Parent Association, School Leadership Team Families, students Spring 2018 Families Ongoing Families Ongoing If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Court Innovation 2018-19 CEP 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Use of the mandatory family engagement time required to be completed by teachers ● Funds for materials and personnel at school events ● Compensation for teacher work time beyond designated school hours ● Pre-determined dates of meetings and physical meeting space Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 50% of our students' families will have attended one or more school wide function. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 School Survey Response Rates Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) The need for services is based on student’s academic performance in several areas:  Regents Grades  Report Card Grades  8thGradeNYSTest  Scores In classsummativeand formative assessments. Programming for AIS is completed by the Academic Policy Team. Requests for AIS can also be made by a teacher, parent, and/or the student. The need for services is based on student’s academic performance in several areas:  Regents Grades  Report Card Grades  8thGradeNYSTest Scores Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) The program is for students who need credit, assistance in passing the Regents exam and/or additional subject area tutoring. Students are assigned based on a consensus made by the student’s grade team. During the school day, academic intervention takes the form of small group instruction with targeted skill based objectives. The curriculum for all ELA programs focuses on intensive literacy instruction using the workshop model. The program is for students who need credit, assistance in passing the Regents exam and/or additional subject area tutoring. Students are assigned based on a consensus made by Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) The method for delivery of service is in the form of small group instruction. Various modes of instructional delivery are used, including Universal Design for Learning, collaborative learning groups, small-group instruction, and whole class instruction. Students are also given individualized support to complete class based assignments and build necessary skills to complete tasks relative the Regents and Common Core Learning Standards The method for delivery of service is in the form of small group instruction. Various modes of instructional delivery are used, including Universal Design for Learning, collaborative learning groups, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. 2018-19 CEP 33   In classsummativeand formative assessments. Programming for AIS is completed by the Academic Policy Team. Requests for AIS can also be made by a teacher, parent, and/or the student. Science The need for services is based on student’s academic performance in several areas: .  Regents Grades  Report Card Grades  8thGradeNYSTest  Scores In classsummativeand formative assessments. Programming for AIS is completed by the Academic Policy Team. Requests for AIS can also be made by a teacher, parent, and/or the student. small-group instruction, and whole class instruction. Students are also given individualized support to complete class based assignments and build necessary skills to complete tasks relative the Regents and Common Core Learning Standards. The method for delivery of service is in the form of small group instruction. Various modes of instructional delivery are used, including Universal Design for Learning, collaborative learning groups, small-group instruction, and whole class instruction. Students are also given individualized support to complete class based assignments and build necessary skills to complete tasks relative the Regents and Common Core Learning Standards the student’s grade team. During the school day, academic intervention takes the form of small group instruction with targeted skill based objectives. The curriculum for all Math programs is based on the type of mathematics course the student is preparing for, including algebra, geometry and/or trigonometry. The program is for students who need credit, assistance in passing the Regents exam and/or additional subject area tutoring. Students are assigned based on a consensus made by the student’s grade team. During the school day, academic intervention takes the form of small group instruction with targeted skill based objectives. The curriculum for Science programs focus on the type of science course the student is preparing for, including Living Environment and Earth Science. AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. . 2018-19 CEP 34  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) The need for services is based on student’s academic performance in several areas:  Regents Grades  Report Card Grades  8 th Grade NYS Test  Scores In class summative and formative assessments. Programming for AIS is completed by the Academic Policy Team. Requests for AIS can also be made by a teacher, parent, and/or the student. The need for services is based on student’s academic performance in several areas:  Regents Grades  Report Card Grades  8 th Grade NYS Test  Scores In class summative and formative assessments. The need is also based on observed behaviors. Programming for services referred to the Guidance Counselor. The program is for students who need credit, assistance in passing the Regents exam and/or additional subject area tutoring. Students are assigned based on a consensus made by the student’s grade team. During the school day, academic intervention takes the form of small group instruction with targeted skill based objectives. The curriculum for Social Studies programs focus on the type of Social Studies course the student is preparing for, Global History and Geography and/or U.S. History. With respect to academics, the guidance counselor identifies students in need of additional credits in all subject areas or in need of passing Regents exams. Students receive new programs with after school tutoring sessions. The guidance counselor monitors these children closely, following up with regular meetings with students, teachers and families. In addition to meeting AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. AIS is provided as lunchtime tutoring during student lunch periods daily and afterschool. The method for delivery of service is in the form of small group instruction. Various modes of instructional delivery are used, including Universal Design for Learning, collaborative learning groups, small-group instruction, and whole class instruction. Students are also given individualized support to complete class based assignments and build necessary skills to complete tasks relative the Regents and Common Core Learning Standards. The guidance counselors meet with students by class each term to explain at-risk services available to them. She also meets with students individually and provides counseling services. Guidance counselors and social workers meet directly with students during the school day as scheduled or as often as needed or as mandated by the IEP . Individual and small group counseling for academic empowerment and crisis intervention is provided to students. She will also formulate behavior intervention plans 2018-19 CEP 35  Requests for services can also be made by a teacher, parent, and/or the student. for students experiencing behavioral challenges. with her mandated students, the guidance counselor has established regular meeting times with students that are considered at risk. Based on referrals by teachers and her own meetings, a program for emotional and social counseling is developed and provided to support the student’s needs in their personal and academic life. 2018-19 CEP 36  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.         - Before-school, after-school, and/or summer programs and transportation to/from - Counseling services - Outreach efforts to identify children and youth living in homeless situations and help them access school programs - Basic needs such as clothing, uniforms, school supplies, and health-related needs, (dental, eye exams, etc.) - Transportation once the student is permanently housed - The work of the liaison - Tutoring services - Parental involvement programs that make a special effort to reach out to parents in homeless situations Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP 37  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP 38  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit highly qualified teachers, we participate in both City Wide Teacher hiring fairs and the New Visions for Public Schools Teacher Staffing Program. We also post vacancies on the New Teacher Finder. In order retain highly qualified teachers, we use the Advance Framework to inform and develop instructional practice. We also provide professional development in line with teacher areas for growth and based on student performance data. Some of the strategies and activities planned are:  Create supportive teacher teams focusing on curriculum alignment to Common Core standards, grade level skill development, rigorous instruction, and student performance data analysis.  Create time in teacher programs for department meetings, grade meetings, intervisitations and feedback sessions.  Conduct Individual Planning Conferences with teachers at the beginning of the school year.  Conduct Summative End of Year Conferences with teachers.  Conduct a yearlong cycle of observation and feedback in accordance with the Advance system.  Complete an entire round of observations by the end of October 2016 to determine what school wide supports are needed in these areas.  Assign first year teachers a mentor to provide guidance in their work.  Provide mentor services to teachers not in their first year.  Implement and assign outside professional development opportunities to develop their content knowledge and teaching pedagogy.  Offer school based professional development in the school every Monday afternoon. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Our school’s affinity, New Visions, will provide external Professional Development in CCSS Instruction. Administration will arrange for teachers to attend these sessions. 2018-19 CEP 39   The NYC DOE will provide external Professional Development in CCSS Instruction. Administration will arrange for teachers to attend these opportunities.  Administration will attend applicable professional development sessions relative to the CCSS.  Administration will review previous teacher observation data, Measures of Student Learning results, Quality Review data and other pertinent school data to determine needs of teachers to be addressed during the Monday professional development block.  A Professional Development Committee will be formed to include teachers and administrators in determining professional development needs.  Administration will create a calendar for each term of school based professional development to be held during the Monday Professional Development block.  The professional development structure will support the needs of teachers by following the differentiated professional development model.  Teachers will cycle through different learning groups with targeted foci including assessment, engaging students in learning and technology to support instruction Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision making process includes teacher teams at the grade and department levels. Teachers discuss with each other what the appropriate assessments would be to measure student performance. Teachers consider the current levels of student performance, the content standards, and the school's instructional expectations. Teachers seek out 2018-19 CEP 40  to include a wide range of assessments to provide a broad yet extensive data set to serve in the analysis of student permanence. Once teachers have decided on the appropriate measures, they confer with administration to discuss choices and seek out feedback and further guidance. The teachers also work together in teams to determine what professional development would be relevant and necessary given the assessment measures selected. Prior to meeting, teachers are informed of the facets of valuable professional development, including the use of assessment results and observation cycles. Teacher teams, grade and department, create a lost of goals and then potential needs. From there, they confer with administration to discuss what professional development activities are necessary. Then, teachers are given the opportunity to plan activities that fall in line with what the teacher teams have considered to be necessary to help them meet their established goals. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections5A - 5E Sections5A - 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 210,832.00 0 0 0 2,116,143.00 x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 CEP 41  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP 42  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Innovation in Advertising and Media in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. High School for Innovation in Advertising and Media will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School for Innovation in Advertising and Media will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP 43   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 CEP 44  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Innovation in Advertising and Media, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2018-19 CEP 45  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 31, 2016 of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2018-19 CEP 46    assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community;  supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 CEP 47  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP 48  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name HIGH SCHOOL FOR INNOVATION IN ADVERTISI Borough Brooklyn School Number 617 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal ADALEZA MICHELENA Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher SIMEON BOYAR Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent DONALD CONYERS Assistant Principal JAMIE WEYERBACHER Coach N/A School Counselor LAKISHA DAVID Parent MARTHA KNIGHT Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member CHRISTINE ETIENNE Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 300 2018-19 CEP 49 Total number of ELLs 21 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? New potential ELL admits take the NYSITELL no later than 10 days after their first day of attendance. The data is recorded by the ESL teacher before being sent out to be officially scored. The ESL teacher uses this data, along with data obtained from English department-wide diagnostic tests (in writing, grammar, reading, etc.) to determine which level is best for the new students (before the official NYSITELL scores are available). Students who have taken the NYSESLAT are scheduled according to the appropriate amount of minutes of instruction they are entitled to. This year every student also took the NYCDOE Performance Task in ELA, and the data obtained from this assessment was used to develop instruction based on needs of the students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Direct instruction and after school tutoring. 2018-19 CEP 50  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review all data sources, including NYSESLAT, MOSL, Regents and other classroom based assessments. Results are analyzed to determine the extent of growth among ELL students, and in what specific areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After school tutoring 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Most students are at beginning level in all grades, with two at intermediate level. suggesting the need for explicit instruction of skills and content as tested in the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet during common planning to gather and address data for instructional support. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Single period, at least once a day, depending on required hours, two types of sections, heterogeneous and homogeneous. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We calculate the number of minutes accordiong to the child's mandates and class program. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is integrated with literacy skills through immersion. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 CEP 51  Students are given assessments in their home language as determined by the content area teacher and ESL teacher recommendations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation is determined based on individual assessment data. Key elements include leveled texts, translated documents, leveled tasks, additional teacher led support, peer support, etc. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Annotating texts Listening and Note Taking Nonlinguistic representations, manipulatives Cooperative Learning Setting Objectives and Providing Feedback Generating and Testing Hypotheses Graphic Organizers 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are programmed according to their program mandates. Curriculum is developed by the teacher and reviewed by adminsitration to ensure it is suitable for students to reach goals and achieve proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are provided targeted intervention in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies during the day during their lunch period. This takes the form of small group tutoring where students work in groups of three to five with a teacher on specific skills. Students can also use the time to work on larger assignments as needed. The school is currently unable to provide after school and Saturday tutoring sessions, but when able, ELLs will be targeted to attend. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Push in model for all content area classes, After school and Saturday sessions for enrichment, incentives for attendance to all enrichment programs (all are dependent on funding), more parent contact to share program information, more project based learning opportunities for ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? none 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are welcome to all school programs. This year, we have several arts programs, including music and dance. The stand alone ENL classes were presented with these opportunities and translation services were provided as needed. Approximately one third of the ELLs are involved in the music and/or dance programs. 2018-19 CEP 52  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELA - laptops, glossaries, leveled texts, audi books, picture books, translation services as needed Math - laptops, glossaries, translation services as needed, manipulatives Science - laptops, glossaries, translation services as needed, manipulatives Social Studies - laptops, glossaries, audio books, translation services as needed CTE - glossaries, translation services as needed 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Translation services are made available as needed. A staff member, such as a paraprofessional, provides translation. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ESL teacher shares the students' levels and grade with teachers, and teachers plan accordingly. Teachers are required to submit plans for ELLs, including service and resources to be used in instruction to administration for review. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELA - laptops, glossaries, leveled texts, audi books, picture books, translation services as needed Math - laptops, glossaries, translation services as needed, manipulatives Science - laptops, glossaries, translation services as needed, manipulatives Social Studies - laptops, glossaries, audio books, translation services as needed CTE - glossaries, translation services as needed 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). An orientation is conducted by school administration, guidance counselor, teachers and other faculty for students and parents to provide an overview of the school and programs and services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not offer any at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Every Monday, we conduct professional development for 80 minutes. It is led by staff where teachers take turns to share and demonstrate best practices. Every session includes a segment on the application for ELLs. The ESL teacher attends outside professional development as provided by the NYCDOE. The ESL teacher attends outside professional development as provided by the NYCDOE throughout the year. 2018-19 CEP 53  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We conduct a workshop in the beginning of the year with ninth grade teachers and other support staff. We highlight needs of ELLS in transition and important supports to provide. We provide them with strategies like small conferences and explicit instructions to help incoming students feel comfortable and safe in high school. Every Monday, we conduct professional development for 80 minutes. It is led by staff where teachers take turns to share and demonstrate best practices. Every session includes a segment on the application for ELLs. A minimum of 8 sessions over the year are designed to specifically address language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Additionally, to meet the 50% of required professional development hours, our ESL teacher attends professional development in both our school and the school he is shared with on campus. These sessions always include a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners . The ESL teacher also attends at least three 6 hour sessions of professional development for teachers of ELLs as provided by the NYCDOE. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL teacher meets with each parent at the start of the school year and invites them for several meetings. Including all parent-teacher conferences. Appropriate interpretation and/or translation services are provided by a staff member or DOE system. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Currently, all ELL parents are invited to attend parent based meetings, including parent association, school leadership and Title 1. Translated notices are always sent out. We are currently working on a plan to develop specific activities that target ELL parents to get them involved in the school community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We have no further additions at this time. 2018-19 CEP 54  2018-19 CEP 55 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Adaleza Michelena, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP 56  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) ADALEZA MICHELENA Principal JAMIE WEYERBACHER Assistant Principal NA Parent Coordinator Melissa Naidoo ENL/Bilingual Teacher MARTHA CURRY Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach LAKISHA DAVID School Counselor DONALD CONYERS Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 8/3/17 10/21/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8/3/17 8/3/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP 57  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K617 School Name: HS for Innovations in Advertising and Media Superintendent: DONALD CONYERS The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Abigail Ashley Havener Gleim Teacher Secretary no no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The means used to assess needs in written translation and oral interpretation include but are not limited to: Review of data obtained from the Home Language Information Survey and DOE Language Preference Letter; the Environmental Survey and the Progress Report ATS report, RPOB, is generated and reviewed to determine the home languages of students. The teachers ask students to indicate language preferences for all types of communication on their information sheets. 2018-19 CEP 58  Administrators, teachers, and LAB/BESIS Coordinator are surveyed to determine the most common home languages of our students. The school collects data using the Home Language Survey regarding the primary language spoken by the parent/guardian of each newly enrolled student and whether the parent/guardian requires language assistance to communicate with the school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. No language represents at least 10% of my school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Association Meeting Notices Monthly (Annually, September) Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Use of NYCDOE Translated Parent Association Meeting Notices Provide translated versions from DOE website Provide DOE translated versions 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Parent Teacher Conferences Four times a year provide interpretation service(s)? Contact the DOE The Translation and Interpretation Unit to schedule interpreters to come to the school. 2018-19 CEP 59  College Information Sessions at least twice a year Intervention/At Risk Student Meetings as needed Contact the DOE The Translation and Interpretation Unit to schedule interpreters to come to the school. Contact the DOE The Translation and Interpretation Unit to schedule interpreters to come to the school. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger translates messages according to parents preferred language as noted in ATS. We have school staff available who can translate in Spanish, French, Creole an Arabic. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the first faculty conference of the year, we reivew Chancellor's Regulation A 663 with staff. We also provide information on the Translation and Interpretation Unit and a list of other translation services available. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 1. The ENL Teacher will host a meeting in September for the students whose families who cannot communicate in English. Parents Bill of Rights documents are available in all languages spoken by parents as noted in ATS. 2. All posters regarding parents' rights to receive information are posted in all languages spoken by parents as noted in ATS. 3. A mailing will be sent home with highlights of Chancellor's Regulation A 663 in all languages spoken by parents as noted in ATS. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 CEP 60  1. A survey will be given to parents at every Parent Association Meeting to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services. 2. A larger survey will be distributed to these families with questions asking about their experience in receiving information from us in their preferred languages. Administration and the ENL teacher will review the feedback and adjust and/or add to improve communication with parents. 2018-19 CEP 61 
