2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 18K629 School Name: CULTURAL ACADEMY FOR THE ARTS AND SCIENCES Principal: SANATHA ALEXIS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Cultural Academy for the Arts & Sciences 331031 Grades 9-12 5800 Tilden Avenue, Third Floor 718-968-6630 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 18K629 718-968-6635 Fax: SanathaAlexis salexis@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: SanathaAlexis Edward Winn SuePendecgast& Gweneth Munroe Christopher Birkel SuePendecgast ChanalleWilson CarlDorissaint Preston Graham District Information Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd, Rm F11 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-368-8515, ext 118 718-368-8515 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Brooklyn South FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauriciere de Govia Executive Director: 415 89 th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11209 MDegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-759-4874 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SanathaAlexis Edward Winn SuePendecgast SuePendecgast ChanalleWilson Carl Dorissaint Preston Graham Gweneth Munroe *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Patricia Moody-Blount Victor Mccalman Patricia Gilkes Christopher Birkel Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Providing equal access to success under an umbrella of support. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Cultural Academy for the Arts and Sciences (CAAS) is a high school, (grades 9 - 12) located on the Tilden Campus in East Flatbush, Brooklyn. We envision the development of the whole child by partnering with all stakeholders to provide equal access to experiences in the arts and sciences that connect to the next stage of our students’ lives. Our goal for College and Career readiness is evident in all the support we provide our students. We currently have 302 students on register, 56 % of which are male. Eighty-four percent of our students are black, 9 % of students are Hispanic, and 3% are White. The other 4% are distributed among Asian, Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, and Multi-racial and not reported. Our school has 21 % students with disabilities (SWDs) and 11% are ELLs. Seventy six percent of our students are economically disadvantaged. 3% of our students live in temporary housing and 1% are in foster care. We are a community school, which enables us to have increased partnerships between our school and other community resources. As a Community School, we offer many after school programs through partnerships with The Leadership Program, Keys to Abundant Life, Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM), Brooklyn Public Library and Opening ACT. These include Martial Arts, Music Production Club, Performing Arts Club (Theatre, Dance and Chorus), Band, Mural Making Club, Fitness Club, GSA, Culinary Arts Club, Jewelry Making Club, Anime Club, Arts and Justice Program, the MOTH, Spoken Word, Book Club, Debate Club, etc. In addition, we are in our second year of implementing our restorative program through our partnership with The Center for Court Innovation. We also have partnerships with the Brooklyn Trio College Preparation Program and Interborough In School Counselling Program . These help us ensure that all students receive personal attention, develop resiliency, energy and perseverance. All of our programs are designed to tap into the natural talents of our students. By doing this we expand their knowledge and understanding of their talents and skills. We also graduate well rounded leaders that are indeed needed in this rapidly changing world. We also have college partnerships and programs which helps ensure that students are college ready. These include the Advancement via Individual Determination (AVID) program; a college readiness program for students in all grade levels which focuses on teaching strengthening students' writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization and reading skills. We are offering LINCT (Lessons in Navigating College Transitions) - a CUNY and DOE initiative to further promote student success in college by reducing the need for remedial classes. LINCT will both assist and equip students to succeed and graduate from college. We offer college now courses through our partnership with Kingsborough Community college and Dual enrollment courses through our partnership with Medgar Evers College. This is our second year as an AP4All school and we will be offering the following 5 Advanced Placement courses: AP English Literature and Composition, AP English Language and Composition, AP United States Government and Politics, AP Biology and AP Art History. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Twenty-one percent of our students have disabilities. Of these, 53.48% spend >60% of their week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes, 15.87% spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services, 11.11% receive Related Services only, and 9.52% spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services. Most of our students are first or second generation immigrants with 11% of our student population being English Language Learners. 6% of our ELLs are entering, 25% are emerging, 25% are transitioning, 25% are expanding and 19% have not been tested. Many of of our ELLs come to us over the counter. There are sometimes disparities between our NYC curriculum and that of their home countries. Many also had years of interrupted formal education. Many manifest their academic challenges through misbehavior, which further impedes their educational progress. Hence, we seek to provide behavioral supports in addition to academic intervention services. There is also a need for culturally relevant curricula. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strong Family-Community Ties: The number of parents attending parent events has increased. Last year we implemented telethons where all staff members called a number of homes the week of an event, during family engagement time, to confirm their attendance. The introduction of IO classroom (Skedula) where we can send personalized messages and the continued use of virtual tools such as School Messenger and Google Hangout, also contributed to that increase. Through the AVID and AP4All teams there was also increased parental involvement in targeted parent meeting focused on college readiness. During our first year as a community school, our community schools director partnered closely with our parent coordinator to plan, promote and facilitate events. In 2018 - 2019, we will foster continued collaboration between the Parent Coordinator, community schools director, parent leaders, individual teachers, teacher teams, paraprofessionals, community school staff and all other members of the school community, to build strong, meaningful relationships with parents, offering support in understanding academic and behavioral expectations and providing guidance for use of school systems to keep abreast of their child’s progress. We will also seek to educate parents on how they can best support their children to meet the increased demands of the Common Core and Next Generation Standards. This year we will focus on interdisciplinary planning so that teachers can work together to connect the curriculum across subjects in ways that increase students’ engagement, deepen students’ understanding of the curriculum, and provide better opportunities for students to succeed. Although our attendance rate increased by 1.4% last school year, it was still below 90%. with 32% of our students being chronically absent. We will intensify our focus on attendance in the 2018-2019 year so that less students will be chronically absent. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K629 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 319 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 4 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 70.5% % Reduced Lunch 10.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.9% 8.8% 1.9% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.06 4% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 68% 54% 69.3% 11.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 100 84 87.5% 3.4% 19.1% 86.8% 1.3% 1.3% 4 19% 8.4 N/A N/A 67% 72% 80.3% 3% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged NO ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A year ago we did not make annual yearly progress (AYP) in both English and Mathematics. However, in the 2017-2018 school year, we made AYP for English, Mathematics, and graduation rate. Our 4 year graduation rate increased by 5%, with only three Cohort T student receiving a local diploma. We were able to accomplish this despite the challenges that we face with our current population. Students who attend CAAS are below level in reading, averaging from 1.7 - 2.2 on their eighth grade exams. We continue to focus on reading and writing skills as our instructional focus areas for improvement this school year. We have also seen challenges in mathematics, with students who average 2.2-2.4 in mathematics. We have done much work in to improve curriculum and instruction over the years. Teachers have worked with coaches from Columbia University to develop common core aligned, coherent curricula and to make appropriate adjustments based on data from interim and summative assessments. This work has been strengthened as we became an AP for All school last school year and a College Access for All school this school year and now receive additional resources and training to support the work of vertical and horizontal teams. We are also in our 4th year of implementation of the Advancement Via Individual Determination (AVID) program which focuses on the development of college readiness skills (writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization and reading). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Although this work has led to coherence in the curriculum, there is a lack of coherence in instruction. On our last quality review, we were rated developing in 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Systems, 1.2 Pedagogy and 2.2 Assessments. One of the pieces of supporting evidence received was that "There were missed opportunities for school faculty to ensure that instruction and tasks are modified based on data analysis to support students meeting the expectations of the CCLS. " Although some good instructional practices were observed, they were not seen consistently across all classrooms. In the quality review findings it was indicated that "teaching strategies are inconsistently executed across subjects and classrooms. There are uneven levels of active student engagement and participation across most classrooms." The Regents data suggests that there is still much work to be done. In June 2018, 22.50% of students scored a level 3 or above on the ELA Regents, 0% scored a level 3 or above on the math Regents, 48.99% scored a level 3 or above on the History Regents and 34.86% scored a level 3 or above on the Science Regents. Through our in depth data analysis, we have unearthed that most of our students struggle to complete rigorous tasks and pass Regents exams because of lack of reading comprehension. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 1% increase in the number of students scoring level 3 and above on all Regents exams during 2018-2019 as compared to the number of students who received passing scores in Regents during 2017-2018 through the continued implementation of close reading strategies and incorporation of discussion techniques across all classrooms, which will enable students to analyze and synthesize information in order to think and write critically, resulting in increased college and career readiness. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Additional staff members will attend AVID Institute and Path to receive training in writing, inquiry, collaboration and reading strategies. Teachers, July 2018 - June 2019 Administration, PCT All Students School-wide workshops for students will be held, so that the AVID trained teachers can introduce and reinforce close reading strategies such as Sum-It-Up, Stop-and-Think, Word Splash, Mapping Meaning, focused note taking, annotation and discussion techniques such as Cooperative Reading / Jigsaw, Flash Debate / Argumentative Talk Protocol, Socratic seminar, and Philosophical chairs to students to help ensure that these practices happen school-wide. Across all classrooms, teachers will focus on vocabulary acquisition, through the use of teaching strategies such as word parts, reading in context, and the Frayer model. AVID Site team and PD committee will continue to collaborate to offer PD around inquiry, discussion techniques, close reading and writing strategies. All students will be introduced to close reading strategies and discussion techniques during the first 3 days of school so that teacher will just have to re-enforce in classrooms. Teachers, Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Administration, PCT, ELA Coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) and administration will push into all classrooms to support teachers with the continued, ongoing implementation of literacy strategies. Opportunities will be provided for teachers to observe writing, inquiry, and reading strategies and discussion techniques being implemented in classrooms through inter- visitations (both within and at other schools) and to provide feedback to colleagues. Administration will continue to look for and reference implementation of close reading, discussion and writing strategies during observations and when providing non-evaluative and evaluative feedback to teachers. Both students and teaching staff will examine student work: Students will be given the opportunities to examine their work (especially exams, projects ) and make corrections explaining why they made the mistake and how they will improve their work Achieve 3000 Literacy Program will continue to be implemented in ENL standalone, SETTS, ELA, and ELA support classes. Instructional Support and ENL teachers will receive additional PD on the effective use of Achieve 3000. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers, students September 2018 – June 2019 Administration ENL and Instructional Support Students and Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 AP Special Education How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -The parent-teacher conference in September will be curriculum night where families will meet with teachers, who will dissect their individual course syllabus in order to support parents' understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core. They will highlight school provided and other free resources that families can use at home to help support students. -Conduct a parent workshop on close reading strategies during curriculum night so that they can partner with the school to help support the development of students' literacy skills. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  -Presenters will model discussion strategies during monthly parent workshops so that they can understand the plus one collaboration requirements for students and help support their development. -Parents will accompany students on a college trip in the spring, where they will get to learn about the college readiness skills that students need to develop in high school and about how they can support that development. -Parent Coordinator will collaborate with the PCT and AVID team to facilitate parent workshop for the AP for ALL and AVID in fall 2018 to teach parents how they can support students at home with their literacy development. -Links to Rigorous Instruction and Common Core resources will be posted on the school's website which will enable ongoing access to information for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6 Days for ELA Coach from Columbia university, 30 days Per Diem to cover teachers while they work with coach and PCT, 100 hours per session to cover teachers as they visit classrooms to observe literacy practices and for parent workshops, registration fees and travel and hotel expenses for 4 teachers to attend AVID Path training, 4 AVID elective classes scheduled for 16 periods per week, 50 hours per session for AVID site team to plan, PCT stipend, transportation costs for 2 buses for college trips. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, there will be a .5% increase in the number of students scoring level 3 and above on all mock Regents exams in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Midpoint Mock Regents exam Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? -Our attendance rate increased from 86.3% in the 2016 - 2017 school year to 87.4 % in the 2017 - 2018 school year . -34% of our students were chronically absent in the 2016-2017 school year. This dropped to 31% in the 2017 - 2018 school year. -In the 2017 - 2018 school year, SWDs had a lower attendance rate than general education students in seven of ten months. -We will keep our school aide whose primary responsibility is attendance outreach. -We currently have an attendance team which meets weekly. -We are entering our second year as a community school, which allows us to provide after school programming for Regents Prep, Science enrichment and clubs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  -As a community school, have access to the New Visions Data Sorter that has critical student information such as attendance rates an patterns, and credit gap analysis in one place. - Teachers currently utilize a portion of weekly parental engagement time to contact families of students who have been absent. -The school's bell schedule has been modified to ensure that grade teams meet at least weekly Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through continued collaboration with the Leadership Program to increase attendance monitoring and intervention, with specific attention to SWDs, the overall student attendance rate will increase by at least 1.1%, from 87.4% to 88.5%, as measured by the 2018-2019 daily attendance rate reported through the Automate the Schools (ATS) system (RYMA report), compared to the 2017-2018 daily attendance rate reported through the Automate the Schools (ATS) system (RYMA report). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent attendance workshop will be conducted on family night in September to discuss the impact of poor attendance on student performance and the strategies that families can use to improve their child's attendance. The CAASS system will be used to send automatic messages to parents of absent and late students daily. IO-Classroom will be used to send period by period attendance notifications to parents. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students, parents September 2018 - June 2019 Parent coordinator, attendance coordinator, administration Parents of students who miss more than 2 days in any given month without documentation of an extenuating circumstance will be summoned to a mandatory meeting with one of the guidance counsellors in order to create action plan Attendance will be a topic of focus during weekly community building circles. Students September 2018– June 2019 CSD, administration, restorative justice coordinators, staff, student success mentors Attendance will be a subject of discussion during students' quarterly check-in with their advisor. Monthly celebrations for students with 90+ and improved attendance rate. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Gift cards for chronically absent students who have at least 10% increase in attendance from month to month. Students who attend school 5 days, all day will receive a price each week and a raffle ticket for a monthly price (provided by PTA) Attendance team will continue to meet weekly on Fridays at 9:35am where targeted case studies and data inquiry cycles will be used to review, develop and test school attendance policies. Attendance team September 2018 – June 2019 Attendance team will receive ongoing training to using the New Visions Data Sorter. New Visions Data Sorter will be utilized by the attendance team for ongoing monitoring of individual student attendance. Current attendance data will be further disaggregated to surface current trends in order to inform the revision of a school wide action plan with appropriate interventions to support improved student attendance. Administration, Community Schools Director (CSD), attendance teacher, guidance counselors, parent coordinator Attendance data will be shared with teachers in grade teams so that they can use in their instructional plans and to provide opportunities for make-up work and transitions back to the class Teachers, chronically September 2018 – June 2019 CSD, Teachers absent students Grade teams will make calls home together once every 2 weeks Sensitivity training will be provided to teachers on strategies to deal with absent students upon re-entry Additional training will be provided for teachers to learn how to effectively use the attendance data from IO Education (Skedula) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Chronically absent students will be referred to the Brooklyn College Trio program and will be programmed for support classes to fill learning gaps Upon re-entry, students with 5+ days consecutive absences will participate in a re-entry circle. Chronically absent students will receive workshops from Wheelchairs Against Guns, Inc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Attendance school aid will send attendance policy, individual student's previous school year attendance data and infographic w home at the beginning of the school year -Parent Coordinator and community schools director will conduct parent workshop during family night in September on the importance of being in school every day -CAASS system and IO Classroom will be used to send daily attendance notifications to parents -Post cards comparing their child's attendance to that of the average high performing student will be sent home to parents of students who have 2+ days absence in a given month -Guidance counsellors will hold mandatory parent meetings with parents of students who have 3+ days absence in a given month -Members of the attendance team will hold mandatory parent meetings through a re-entry circle with parents of students who have 5+ days consecutive absences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1 hour per week for the attendance team to meet, Family Assistant/Outreach Worker, IO Classroom/Skedula messenger subscription, materials for parent workshops, Remind app, per session hours for extra support classes, schedule adjustments for the support classes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the attendance team, grade teams, and administration will monitor school-wide attendance data monthly and compare the data to measure if attendance rates have increased by at least .55% as a result of implementing attendance incentives and interventions to determine if the school is on a course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS RSAL report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our last Quality Review stated teacher teams meet consistently to analyze assessments and work for targeted, at risk students. Distributed leadership structures are in place to allow teachers to have a voice in decisions. Teacher teamwork and leadership capacity lead to adjustments to curricula and student progress toward goals for groups of students across the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grade teams will collaborate to develop and execute at least 1 interdisciplinary unit on each grade level to connect the curriculum across subjects in ways that increase students’ engagement, deepen students’ understanding of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26 the curriculum, and provide better opportunities for student success as measured by a 3 % increase in the number of students earning 10+ credits in the 10th grade. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Master schedule will be modified to allow grade teams to meet once per week within the school day and once per month after school to provide time for teachers to formulate and coordinate the components of an integrated unit. Teachers Administration September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher Team Leaders, Administration -Grade teams will examine the scope and sequence and priority standards of concurrent classes, to find connections between classes and then choose a topic of interest to students that allows for authentic integration of multiple subject areas. -Team will continue to work together to craft relevant essential questions, `determine instructional sequence, design tasks and develop culminating interdisciplinary assessment/project. Professional development will be provided on developing interdisciplinary curricular. Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Teacher Team Leaders, Peer Collaborative Teacher and instructional coaches will push in to support teachers with the implementation of interdisciplinary unit. Teachers, students Training will be provided for parents on how they can support students with completing interdisciplinary assignments. Parents, Students September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, CPET coaches PCT, CPET coaches Parent Coordinator Administration Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Peer Collaborate Teacher (PCT) will provide training for parents on how they can support students with completing interdisciplinary assignments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule to support teacher team work, Time relief for PCT, 4 1/2 days of coaching from instructional coaches. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, there would be a 1.5 % increase in the number of students in the 10th grade earning 5+ credits as a result of grade teams collaborating to develop an interdisciplinary unit to provide better opportunities for student success. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS Admin custom report 1.19. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. -The average MOTP rating in domain 3 for all teachers in the 2017-2018 school year was 2.33. The individual teacher average MOTP rating in domain 3 ranged from 1.42 to 3.08. -The school was rated developing in Pedagogy, Assessment and Monitoring and Revising Systems on the 2017 quality review. The report stated, "some lessons did not engage students in high-level cognitive activities. Structures did not always allow for different learning pathways for understanding for ELLs and students with disabilities....some classes did not make effective use of scaffolding techniques, modeling opportunities, needs-based grouping, activating prior knowledge, or technology to provide multiple entry points into lessons. " The report further stated that, " There are missed occasions for teachers to re-teach or spiral content based on students’ responses and their current needs....students do not consistently self- or peer-assess against assessment criteria so that they can monitor their own understanding and be aware of their next learning steps. -In our 2017 quality review report, it was stated that "School leaders model and communicate clear expectations to the school’s community via both verbal and written structures that help teachers with the school’s non-negotiable 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  expectations... School leaders consistently communicate high expectations for lesson planning and effective teaching based on the elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching." -At the end of last school year, the entire staff co-created our instructional focus after examining relevant data and the current systems, structures and instructional practices that we have in place. -There are teacher and school improvement inquiry teams in place to examine students work, teacher practice and other forms of data in order to examine and improve school-wide practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of a School Improvement Team, stakeholders representing all roles and perspectives in the school will help develop, monitor and refine our shared vision and mission for learning and regularly evaluate strategic processes and structures to promote the school’s continuous and sustainable improvement, as measured by a .18 point increase in the average domain 3 MOTP score for teachers; moving from 2.33 in the 2017-2018 school year, to 2.51 in the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A voluntary school improvement team will be formed with different school community stakeholders. Staff and parents June 2018 -June 2019 Administration School Improvement Team will meet during the summer to examine our current practices through the lens of the quality review rubric and to plan strategically for sustained improvement. Top tier teachers will push into classrooms to model best practices and to co-teach. A data analyst will be hired who will be responsible for collecting and organizing data. Teachers Administration, PCT September 2018 - June 2019 School Improvement team will conduct targeted instructional walks once per marking period and provide feedback to staff and administration. Professional development plan will be adjusted based on the results of the instructional walks and quarterly data dives. Professional development will be given to the school improvement team to increase their data literacy. School Improvement Team August, 2018 Administration Quarterly meetings will be held with the school improvement to disaggregate available data and plan . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Parent members of the School Improvement Team will help plan and facilitate bi-annual Breakfast with the Principal/Parent Walk Through. Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Accountability and Graduation data will be shared with parents at bi-annual Breakfast with the Principal/Parent Walk Through. One parent walk-through will be conducted each semester, where parents will have an opportunity to observe instruction practice and school environment and provide feedback to staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will serve on the School Improvement Team Parent members of the School Improvement Team will help plan and facilitate bi-annual Breakfast with the Principal/Parent Walk Through. Parent Coordinator will receive direction and support from administration and professional development opportunities to build stronger partnerships between parents and school to impact upon student success. Events will be planned with the PTA to push further on this aim. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 100 hours of per session for data specialist, 64 hours per session to pay teachers for quarterly School Improvement Team meetings, coverage pay for when members of the School Improvement Team to participate in instructional walks, $800 for food and supplies for bi-annual Breakfast with the Principal/Parent Walk Through. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a .09 point increase in the average domain 3 MOTP score for teachers over the 2017-2018 average score as a result of the implementation of a School Improvement Team to help develop, monitor and refine our shared vision and mission for learning and regularly evaluate strategic processes and structures to promote the school’s continuous and sustainable improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School level MOTP report in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed X X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The principal nurtures a trusting and inclusive culture and aligns professional development to both family outreach and student progress to promote behaviors that are conducive to students' needs. (1.4) Parent Involvement continues to be a challenge in our school with low attendance at PTA meetings (approximately 10% of our student population’s parents attend). The Parent Coordinator has made great efforts to build parent involvement by providing every parent with access to his cell number, visiting homes along with the attendance teacher and on his own. Parent communication through the Remind and IO education / Skedula application continues to improve with evidence of increased parent – staff communication through email. This year, it appears we will have a more committed PTA administration with four parents taking the lead as the Executive Council as well as other parent volunteers who are here on a weekly basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the implementation of student led conferences will result in at least a 5% increase in the attendance at family engagement activities and parental involvement in support of students' academic progress, as measured by attendance sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) -Each student will be assigned to an advisor -Each teacher will advise 13 - 15 students of their choice Students and parents September 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers -Advisors will be the point person for parental outreach and will work to establish a strong relationship with families -Advisory sessions will be held the second Thursday of every month -Avisory teachers will support students with preparation for student led conferences -Students will practice for student led conferences during advisory -Professional development on student led conferences will be given to staff Teachers -Teachers will observe teacher led conferences happening at other schools -Grade teams will meet every Tuesday during their professional activity period and once per month during Wednesday PD. Teachers -Advisors will discuss the progress of their students with colleagues during weekly grade team meetings PD Committee September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Administration, grade team leaders -During the November Parent Teacher Night, there will be a parent workshop on student led conferences to empower them to support their child(ren) and to be part of the implementation Parents October 2018 -June 2019 Parent Coordinator English Teachers -Information about student led conferences - the process and the advantages, will be sent home to parents -Information about student led conferences will be posted on the school's website Math Teachers Social Studies teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrative support If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The leadership program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 60 hours coverage pay for the teachers who do not usually teach during the period that advisories are held, folders for each student to keep their goals and pieces of work that they will share during parent teacher conferences, materials for workshop and PD, 24 hours per session for teachers to observe student led conference at another school, one period per week for grade teams to meet Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the preparation for the implementation of student led conferences will result in at least a 2.5% increase in the attendance at family engagement activities and parental involvement in support of students' academic progress, as measured by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance at parent-teacher conferences, meetings, workshops and other family engagement and parent involvement events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher Grade Team Case management Student Intervention Team School Implementation Team Attendance Team Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group One-to-one Small group One-to-one Small group Tutoring Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students are identified and programmed for two additional 45 minute periods during the school day each week that include SETSS support as well as support in core subjects as needed. Services include tutoring, SETSS, and ESL. Teachers, students and parents have access to their progress data on IO-Classroom (Skedula). As part of our teamwork, we will work to find ways to provide multiple entry points and assessments aligned with Next Generation Learning Standards. All staff meets twice per week to insure ongoing students’ content and skills, emotional and social needs assessments, planning and goal setting. In addition, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Additional support classes are during the school day, twice per week. ∙ SETSS is offered throughout the day five days per week and additional two classes per week. ∙ Tutoring is offered after school. ∙ FuelEd Learning on-line classes offer services for students with special needs and ESL. Students who are taking classes in this fashion can do so in school or wherever they have computer access with the exception of tests. ∙Thereis also after school Regents prep one day per week for each of the core subject areas. ∙AfterSpring Break, there is an additional 3 hours of Regents prep for each core 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  subject area on Saturdays. professional development is determined by the Professional Development Team to study and develop research-based strategies to provide all students access to academic language and vocabulary development. Please note: Any identified SIFE and Bilingual students will be given additional instructional time to explore both the language, reading and writing skills in the core subjects because we have a push-in ESL Teacher. ESL students receive their mandated services from our certified ESL certified. We participate in a SIFE grant that is campus-wide. Saturday classes are available to all our students. We will purchase Achieve 3000 to help develop and support support language acquisition and reading comprehension. A smartboardwas purchased for the ENL teacher to support differentiated instruction. We are also looking to purchase digital 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Mathematics Teacher Grade Team Case management Student Intervention Team School Implementation Team Attendance Team Small group One-to-one translator or a translation APP that is comparable with I-pads to support. This year, we will also add an additionalESL teacher. Furthermore, we are seeking to fill vacancies with bilingual French or HatianCreole teachers who will deliver in in both languages when possible so that the language barrier does not impede students’ academic success. Students are identified and programmed for two additional 45-minute periods during the school day each week that include SETSS support as well as support in core subjects as needed. Services include tutoring, SETSS, and ESL. Teachers, students and parents have access to their progress data on IO-Classroom . As part of our teamwork, we will work to find ways to provide multiple entry points and assessments aligned with Common Core Learning Standards All staff meets twice per week to insure Additional support classes are offered during the school day, twice per week. ∙ SETSS is offered during first period four days per week and during additional support classes. ∙ Tutoring is offered after school. ∙ Aventa/Fueled Learning on-line classes offer services for students with special needs and ESL. Students who are taking classes in this fashion can do so in school or wherever they have computer access with the exception of tests. As part of our teamwork, we will work to find ways to provide multiple 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  ongoing students’ content and skills, emotional and social needs assessments, planning and goal setting. In addition, professional development is determined by the Professional Development Team to study and develop research-based strategies to provide all students access to academic language and vocabulary development. Please note: Any identified SIFE and Bilingual students will be given additional instructional time to explore both the language, reading and writing skills and the core subjects. Those students receive their mandated services on campus each day. We do have a SIFE grant that is campus-wide. Saturday and after school classes are available to all our students. A smartboardwill be purchased for the teacher that does not have one to aid in differentiated math instruction. entry points and assessments aligned with Common Core Learning Standards All staff meets twice per week to insure ongoing students’ content and skills, emotional and social needs assessments, planning and goal setting. In addition, professional development is determined by the Professional Development Team to study and develop research-based strategies to provide all students access to academic language and vocabulary development. Please note: Any identified SIFE and Bilingual students will be given additional instructional time to explore both the language, reading and writing skills and the core subjects. Those students receive their mandated services on campus each day. We do have a SIFE grant that is campus-wide. Saturday and after school classes are available to all our students. ESL. Students who are taking classes in this fashion can do so in school or wherever 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Science Teacher Grade Team Case management Student Intervention Team School Implementation Team Attendance Team Social Studies Teacher Grade Team Case management Student Intervention Team School Implementation Team Small group One-to-one they have computer access with the exception of tests ∙ Additional support classes are offered during the school day, twice per week. ∙ SETSS is offered during first period four days per week and during additional support classes. ∙ Tutoring is offered after school. ∙ Fueled Education on-line classes offer services for students with special needs and ESL. Students who are taking classes in this fashion can do so in school or wherever they have computer access with the exception of tests. Small group One-to-one ● Additional support classes are offered during the school day, twice per week. ● SETSS is offered during first period four days per week and during additional support classes. Students are identified and programmed in small groups for two 45 minute periods during the school day each week and after-school classes for Science tutoring, SETSS . Teachers, students and parents have access to their progress data on Teacher-Ease. As part of our teamwork, we will work to find ways to provide multiple entry points and asses Next Generation Learning Standards All staff meets twice per week to insure ongoing students’ content and skills, emotional and social needs assessments, planning and goal setting. Students are identified and programmed for an addition two 60-minute periods during the school day each week and after-school classes for Social Studies tutoring, SETSS 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43 ● Tutoring is offered after school. ● Fueled Education on-line classes offer services for students with special needs and ESL. Students who are taking classes in this fashion can do so in school or wherever they have computer access with the exception of tests. Attendance Team Student Intervention Team Teachers, students and parents have access to their progress data on Teacher-Ease. School Implementation Team Attendance Team As part of our teamwork, we will work to find ways to provide multiple entry points and assessments aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. All staff meets three times per week to insure ongoing students’ content and skills, emotional and social needs assessments, planning and goal setting. In addition, professional development is determined by the Professional Development Team to study and develop research-based strategies to provide all students access to academic language and vocabulary development. All staff meets twice per week to insure ongoing students’ content and skills, emotional and social needs assessments, planning and goal setting. In addition, professional development is determined by the Professional Development Team to study and develop 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2 Guidance Counselors,On-Site Interborough Social Worker, Center for Court Innovation Restorative Justice Coordinator and Associate who are certified social workers. research-based strategies to provide all students access to academic language and vocabulary development. Please note: Any identified SIFE and Bilingual students will be given additional instructional time to explore both the language, reading and writing skills in the core subjects. ESL students who are classified to receive mandated ESL services. Those students receive their mandated services from our certified ESL certified. We participate in a SIFE grant that is campus-wide. Saturday classes are available on campus to all our students. We currently have two Guidance Counselors who will continue to provide guidance and crisis counseling services during the school day, one period a week or more frequently if needed, to all students especially SWD, LEP, Black, Hispanic and Economically Disadvantaged students in all grades. One to one, small group One to one Small group ● During the school day. However, if there is a need outside of school, our campus school social worker offers services to parents and students at Interborough Developmental and Consultation Center. ● School nurse is on campus and provides services during the school day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Students are assisted in learning how to deal with various personal issues including school, friends, family, current events, etc. Our school now has a SAPIS worker who will come in on Monday and Tuesday of each week to provide counseling as well as support for students who need help with substance abuse. Our campus has a school social worker (Interborough Developmental and Consultation Center) who will offer clinical services, educational, social and personal services during the school day on an as needed basis to at risk students including students in the SWD, LEP, Black, Hispanic and Economically Disadvantaged subgroups. We have a nurse on staff at the Tilden Campus who provides health-related services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 6 students in temporary housing entering the 2018-2019 school year. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Monies are set aside from the school’s budget to provide students in temporary housing with supplies needed, i.e. school uniforms, notebooks, pens, pencils and other items.  Our schools guidance counselors, social work and SAPIS worker will support STH students, checking in regularly to insure their needs are met.  Teacher teams work to identify students in crisis or academic need and work to support them. Our SIT/Case Management Team is a forum for teams to identify students in need to develop ways as a school community to resolve issues and support student needs.  Our Parent Coordinator works with parents one-on-one to provide help and mentorship with topics that include: understanding educational accountability, graduation requirements, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, literacy in addition to support in accessing community and support services, technology to build parents’ work skills and assisting their children, how to use the TeacherEase E-gradebook and navigate parent support links, support families through the FAFSA process.  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy, computer skills, working with FAFSA, etc.  Our Parent Coordinator established a network where parents are able to contact him any time by phone or text to discuss student progress, school activities or support. A phone log is kept to maintain consistent parental contact.  Over advisors will offer additional support to STH. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds.  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. -Recruiting teachers from alternative pathways, such as the NYC Teaching Fellows. - Mathematics and ELA Coaches from CPEt, Columbia University to support and develop best teacher practices rooted in student support and success. -Use of Peer-Coaching model as a PROSE initiative for teachers to provide ongoing support and the development of best teacher practices, supported by administration and the National Educator Program. -Mentoring of all new teachers, providing opportunities for peer coaching and working collaboratively in academic and vertical teams every week. -Working with teacher team leaders to identify relevant professional development both on and off-site to build professional practice based on staff needs. -We now have a PCT that is working together with administration to help develop teachers. -Offering advanced placement and college-now classes for staff to teach. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). -Disaggregating available data and working with administrators, PD committee and teacher team leaders to identify relevant professional development both on and off-site to build professional practice based on staff needs. -In conjunction with CPET, Columbia University, ongoing professional development is provided in mathematics and ELA/Literacy in order to address our instructional focus in literacy and math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  - Further develop our Peer Coaching paradigm as part of our PROSE initiative in order to self-assess, improve instruction, and raise student achievement. -AVID training for staff that is rooted in best practices for college and career readiness. -This year we will work with Ramapo -Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community. -Staff attends PD sessions that are given by the Borough Field Support Center, NYSED and Superintendency team members and then turn keys this information to staff during the weekly vertical team meetings. -Yearly Team Share-Out presentations to share best practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Academy grade teams and Vertical subject teams will continue to work with team leaders and data specialist to analyze student work and assessments in order to make informed instructional decisions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Teachers will work collaboratively with their colleagues on the professional development team to make decisions regarding relevant and practical professional development opportunities aligned with our instructional focus and individual staff needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal $210,454 $16,979 $68,805 0 0 $9,979 $2,381,942 Tax Levy (FSF) Local X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C 5C, 5D 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D and 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52   Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Cultural Academy for the Arts & Sciences, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Cultural Academy for the Arts & Sciences will support parents and families of Title I students by: ∙ providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ∙ providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ∙ fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ∙ providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ∙ sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ∙ providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ∙ actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ∙ engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ∙ ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ∙ support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ∙ maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ∙ conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ∙ provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ∙ host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ∙ schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ∙ translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ∙ conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ∙ holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ∙ hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year after every PTA meeting; ∙ encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ∙ supporting or hosting Family Day events; ∙ establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ∙ encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ∙ providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ∙ developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ∙ providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Cultural Academy for the Arts & Sciences, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Next Generation Learning Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ∙ using academic learning time efficiently; ∙ respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ∙ implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ∙ offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ∙ providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ∙ conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ∙ convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ∙ arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ∙ respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ∙ providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ∙ involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ∙ providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ∙ ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ∙ ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ∙ notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ∙ arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ∙ planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ∙ creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ∙ assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ∙ sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ∙ supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ∙ ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ∙ advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ∙ monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ∙ ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  ∙ check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ∙ read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ∙ set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ∙ promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ∙ encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ∙ volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ∙ participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ∙ communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ∙ respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ∙ become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ∙ participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ∙ take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ∙ share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ∙ attend school regularly and arrive on time; ∙ complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ∙ follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ∙ show respect for myself, other people and property; ∙ try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ∙ always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Through our after school programs we offer additional academic regents prep and science enrichment to help prepare our students for testing. In addition our cooking club is used to help students gain life skills to enter into our culinary program. In December we will be adding Saturday Academy to help struggling learners and provide enrichment for students who are on track. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will reduce the rate of chronic absenteeism from 34% to 29% utilizing after school programs that encourage students to come to school during the day. Through these programs we will increase the attendance not only for day to day but to reduce lateness on a daily basis. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The extra-curricular activities offered in the community school model give a sense of care in the students’ development. Knowing we care about their education, creativity, well being, and having their parents involved gives them the tools they need to achieve their academic goals. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership The Leadership Program Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Chronically Absent Students -Performing Arts, Martial Arts, Mural Arts, Band and Music Production clubs will be happening after school. By June 2019 we will reduce the rate of chronic absenteeism from 34% to 29% utilizing after school programs that encourage students to come to school during the day. Through these programs we will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  The Leadership Program Students interested in Culinary Arts TRIAD Students with Paraprofessionals -Incentives for students who get to school on time increase the attendance not only for day to day but to reduce lateness on a daily basis. -Success mentor program -Collaborating with attendance team for ongoing attendance monitoring and to develop and implement attendance action plan -Educating parents of students who are chronically absent -Collaborating with students, teachers and community leaders to create healthy cooking classes and cooking programs Providing professional development for paraprofessionals so that they can be adequately trained to meet the needs of their students with disabilities By June 2019, we will host 30 cooking classes and 2 workshops to empower students, parents and staff to understand how nutrition, physical activity, personal development, and lifestyle choices can be the keys to reaching their full potential. By June 2019, we will to provide 4 professional development sessions for paraprofessionals to help ensure a more active and inclusive role in the classroom . . . . Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Community Schools Grant, Community Schools Director, Teachers, Teaching Artists, Chefs, Supplies and Materials, Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. This is our second year of having a community school director. He manages the after school programs and helps to spearhead attendance improvement initiatives. He serves as part of the cabinet and is extremely active in the planning of community events. He partners closely with our parent coordinator and the other CSDs and parent coordinators in the building to help provide workshops and other parent empowerment events. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  ELT will be done through our partnership with The Leadership Program as part of our community schools grant. We will offer additional arts programming through our partnership with Brooklyn Academy of Music. College advisement, Regents Tutoring and tours will be supplementing through partnership with Brooklyn College Trio. Our counseling will be supported through our partnership with the Center for Court Innovation and Inter-borough In-School Counseling Program. The CSD will be part of weekly attendance team meetings , where they will use the data sorter to review attendance data and plan and revise interventions to help improve attendance for target populations and the school as a whole. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. .Extended Learning Time (ELT) will be from 2:15 pm - 5:15 pm, administrator to supervise during ELT teachers to teach regents prep after school and Saturday Academy, school aide to distribute and account for after school snacks, promotional and instructional materials. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. October 15, 2018 (when funding is released) to June 26, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III after school program will include After School Math for Common Core Algebra, Geometry, Living Environment/Earth Science, Chemistry, ENL ELA, ENL Global and U.S. History Regents Prep. The After school program will take place on: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays from 2:15 to 4:15pm. The Saturday program will include ELA, Math and Science from 9am to 3pm. These instructional programs will involve ENL students who will benefit with supplemental activities as they reach proficiency in English. It will serve all ENL students that will be eligible to take any of the regents. The program will involve one certified Bilingual Math teacher and a Certified Math teacher, Bilingual Science teacher, certified English and certified Social Studies Teacher supported by an ESL teacher that will provide Title III Professional Development on ENL strategies and scaffolds during Wednesday Professional Development. This will enable teachers to infuse these strategies into their instruction and provide ACCESS to the curriculum and make the content comprehensible for the ENL students in the room. Students will work in groups, pairs and individually with the teachers. The instructional focus will be on Math literacy and building strategies for the regents. This will allow ENL students to improve English and Math skills. The focus will always be to help ENL students reach English proficiency that will help and support students in all content areas. The school has purchased the following programs: Castle Learning, Achieve 3000 and ALEK(math software). The instructional program will begin in October 2018 and end in December 2018, it will resume during term 2 March 2019 to June 2019. The groups will meet two time a week from 2:15 to 3:45 pm. The language of instruction will be in English and two classes will be in Creole plus all students will be supplied with bilingual dictionaries. All teachers will be provided supplies such as: chart paper, loose-leaf paper, calculators, highlighters, pens and pencils. The Guidance counselors will provide outreach to students who are at risk and not attending. Teachers will also reach out to parents via phone/email and Skedula/Pupil path. Parents and students can track their work on pupil/path. The anticipated measurable outcomes will be progress in English and achieving passing scores on the regents. The expectation is to produce quality activities that allow students to perform and achieve at high levels. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: Our Columbia University coaches and the ENL teacher and PD committee will provide professional development and workshops during extended day (Wednesday from 2:15pm to 3:30pm). This will be ongoing throughout the year. The PD committee is comprised of: Ms. Deloatch (Peer Collaborator), Ms. Nalty (ENL), Ms. Gilkes (Math), Mr. Birkel (Social Studies), Mr. Roy (Science). This will be a way to improve and support instruction as well as develop new strategies in order to improve students’ outcomes. The direct instruction Teachers for Title III after school regents classes will take what they have learned from the Title III professional development Wednesday (Monthly) meetings and apply it in their classes. During PD, teachers will model word study and vocabulary strategies for ENL students, scaffolds and Specially designed instructional strategies. The focus will be on literacy with elements of comprehension strategies, text complexity and will include differentiation. The topics to be covered are; language acquisition, language access for effective employment & communication with limited English proficient parents, Scaffolding for ELL’s, Immigration issues, Toolkit for subject area teachers. PD will involve the school’s focus on questioning and discussion and improving writing skills. Teachers will engage in inter-visitations with a focus on differentiating instruction for ELLS The school supervisors will oversee and monitor the PD on all levels. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental engagement will be directed by our Parent Coordinator, Mr. Young and supported by our Guidance Counselors: Mr. Ken Tanzer and Ms. Luisana Victorica (bilingual) and Ms. Nalty (ENL Teacher). We will collaborate with the other 2 schools on campus to provide workshops to empower parents on ENL students to support them at home. Parents of our ENL students will be invited in throughout the year to meet with their child’s Guidance Counselor and discuss graduation requirements and transition for post High School paths. This will have a profound impact on our ENL students and their performance in school. By creating a connection with our Parents of ENL students and including the student in discussions that pertain to their future success will provide them with the information they need to successfully navigate their high school career. In addition, they will discuss their child’s progress academically and socially. The Parent Coordinator will conduct Parent brunches throughout the year as part of our building relationships with our ENL families. The Parent Brunches provide a social setting and relaxed environment for our ENL families to become part of our community. Parents will be notified through phone calls, invitations and letters back packed home. All records, agendas, attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities sheets will be in English, Chinese, Spanish and Haitian Creole. These documents will be kept on file in the main office, and the AP in charge. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 9893  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 2400 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 73 N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for after school Regents Prep and parent workshops Per Diem for coverage when teachers engage in inter-visitation Columbia coaches will offer PD on ENL instruction and push into classrooms to support implementation Materials for PD above. N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Cultural Academy For The Arts & Sciences Borough Brooklyn School Number 629 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sanatha Alexis Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Julie Nalty Teacher/Subject Area Marie Petit-Blanc/Math Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Luisana Victorica Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Halley Tache Coach type here School Counselor Kenneth Tanzer Parent X Parent Coordinator Martin Young Field Support Center Staff Member Soeurette Fougere Other (Name and Title) Christine Etienne/SECAP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 294 Total number of ELLs 36 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.24% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? CAAS has created an ELA baseline assessment to be administered at the beginning of the year. We are utilizing this data in order to support our ELL students with decoding skills and be able to work with them on their "frustration" level of literacy. CAAS has created a Grade Team network. The Grade Teams use anecdotal data based on teacher observations, goals and interim benchmarks. Students conference with their teachers based on their learning goals and are actively involved in developing goals and steps for success. This enables our teachers to create lesson plans that are differentiated for these students as well as others in need of the extra support. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  CAAS as a High School receives students directly from other countries with little to no English language skills as well as no formal education. Through teacher created assessments and the NYSITELL we find that our students have multiple levels with respect to their English skills. This enables us to tailor our instruction for ENL students. In addition we have found that writing and listening are the weaker skills according to data from the NYSESLAT as well as teacher observation. Looking at the NYSESLAT data from 2017 we found that 22 out of 33 showed low scores in listening and 12 out of 33 showed low scores in writing. This data, as stated above, is used throughout the school during vertical and grade team meetings in order to support our ENL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? This year ( 2017-2018) CAAS has restructured our schedule to include common planning time by discipline. This collaborative process allows staff to look at and analyze student data, and discuss various strategies to be implemented to further pedagogy. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the strengths of our program by improved NYSESLAT scores, in addition to passing regents scores for each student. We include looking at ELL students' academic progress each marking period throughout the year in each content area. Our ENL teachers will continue to provide integrated ENL and stand alone supports that will enable her to evaluate our students within their academic class as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Common planning time, in addition to individual conferences with administration will serve to discuss student data. This will allow us to recommend strategies and plan accordingly for student success. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] CAAS provides AIS (in the form of after school programs in multiple subject areas, including ENL) to those students who are in jeopardy and require the extra support. This is done in order to ensure minimal recommendations for evaluations. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. CAAS currently has 41 students in the ENL Program. The data reveals that listening and writing skills need to be addressed and improved across all grade levels. The data below is only for students who took the NYSESLAT in May 2017 (includes 2 graduates, whose cores are a "guesstimate" since scores are not include on the RLAT). The data patterns are as follows: 9th Grade NYSESLAT/NYSITELL 2017: 1 student scored Entering (Beginner) 5 students scored Emerging (Low Intermediate) 11 student scored Transitioning (High Intermediate) 13 students scored Expanding (Advanced) 0 students scored Commanding (Proficient) 10th Grade NYSESLAT/NYSITELL 2017: 0 students scored Entering (Beginner) 1 student scored Emerging (Low Intermediate) 0 students scored Transitioning (High Intermediate) 1 student scored Expanding (Advanced) 1 student scored Commanding (Proficient) 11th Grade NYSESLAT/NYSITELL 2017: 0 students scored Entering (Beginner) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  1 student scored Emerging (Low Intermediate) 0 students scored Transitioning (High Intermediate) 1 student scored Expanding (Advanced) 0 students scored Commanding (Proficient) 12th Grade NYSESLAT/NYSITELL 2017: 0 students scored Entering (Beginner) 0 students scored Emerging (Low Intermediate) 0 students scored Transitioning (High Intermediate) 2 students scored Expanding (Advanced) 0 students scored Commanding (Proficient) 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? RLAT report is available to all staff. ENL teacher advises content area teachers with this information for the purposes of classroom groupings, lesson differentiation (including translated texts), bilingual glossary access and any additional necessary supports . Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. CAAS delivers instruction for ENL students in a stand-alone ENL class seven periods per week. This class is 45 minutes long and taught by our certified ENL teachers. We also provide a two-hour ENL support class on Thursdays. Due to the small size of our school, we have combined two consecutive grade levels into these stand-alone classes in order to provide the mandated minutes. We also use the integrated co-teaching model for ELA classes for grades 9-12. Our ENL students travel by cohort daily. Because these classes are team-taught, there is more support for language proficiency. Our ENL teachers co-teach in the ELA classes in order to provide the required and additional support to our students. The content areas are delivered using the ICT program model through various formats. Teachers use multiple pathways of entry into instruction based on the students' needs and the type of learners they are. We will continue to use the Universal Design for Learning Guidelines and strategies that are designed to enable ENL Learners to develop their English language skills. English is the language of instruction. In order to promote language development, teachers utilize visual aides to enrich student learning. All ENL students are provided with these supplemental supports in order for them to work towards achieving language proficiency on the NYSESLAT and scoring well on the ELA regent. The following supports for our ENL students are available at CAAS: Achieve 3000 program, iPad cart with Duolingo application, SmartBoard/Promethean technology, teacher-created rubrics using DOK matrix, subject-specific (Math, Science, Social Studies) bilingual glossaries in Spanish, Haitian-Creole and Arabic, three Bilingual Paraprofessionals (2 Spanish, 1 Haitian-Creole), an ENL teacher and a foreign language teacher that provides instructional support. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A at this time c. DL program. If applicable. N/A at this time 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL students are provided their mandated minutes of ENL instruction by our certified ENL teachers. Our ENL teachers follow the state mandated curriculum for ELL students. All ENL students receive their mandated minutes of ENL instruction in various combinations with certified ENL teachers in ENL class seven (7 )periods per week, in addition to five (5) ELA classes. Emerging students who need additional support have access to tutoring as needed in all subject areas. All ENL students' classes are programmed using the ICT model to provide them with additional academic support and equal access to the curriculum. In addition, all students have 225 minutes of ELA per week. All classes at CAAS focus on literacy, including deconstructing and reconstructing text, close reading/annotation strategies and the use of academic language. Saturday classes are offered as part of a campus-wide SIFE grant and are available to all ENL students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in the ICT program model through various forms. Teachers differentiate their instruction based on the students' needs and what type of learners they are. English is the language of instruction. In order to enrich language development, teachers work to utilize visual aides in order to enrich student learning. All ENL students are provided with these supplemental supports in order for them to work towards testing out of ENL. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are given the option to request State and Local exams in their own language. Our ENL teachers also provides ENL students with home language supports. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Upon receipt of NYSESLAT scores, the RLAT report is reviewed to identify ALL ENL ( SIFE, Newcomer, Developing, Longterm and Former ELLs) student needs. All students are then scheduled for the mandated minutes. Former ELLs are placed in ELA classrooms where the ENL instruction is provided as an integrated ENL classroom. In addition, CAAS reviews the incoming 9 th grade students to identify any ELL students requiring services as well as those ELLs who have tested out. We ascertain the year of proficiency and determine if they should be scheduled for either one or two years of mandated services dependent on the year of proficiency. There is a campus-wide Saturday SIFE support program that all ENL students may attend. Students receive small group instruction in order to support their individual language and literacy needs. CAAS offers an after-school small group support/tutoring one day per week with ENL teachers in addition to students mandated minutes. This provides additional opportunities for speaking and listening in English in a smaller setting with an emphasis in conversational practice, phonemic awareness and American acculturation. An important aspect of this additional time is the opportunity to become acquainted with these newcomers in a less formal, albeit professional way. Our ENL teachers pair newcomers with intermediate/advanced students during her lessons so that they provide support, clarify material so that all students have equal access to the material. She also uses the SmartBoard to provide visual learning opportunities, in addition to the use of realia, and graphic organizers as part of her lessons. Dependent upon students' individual needs, our teachers differentiate their lessons, planning for different goals and outcomes according to specific language needs, i.e. creating posters, composing essays, leveling complex texts, etc. She provides all of her students with glossaries and continues to build her bilingual library. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Our ENL teachers have been trained in and uses the new Academic Vocabulary Tool Kit curriculum. We are a family-oriented community and both students and staff are made aware of new students through classes that our ENL teachers team teach in, and discussions regarding planning and additional support are conducted during co-planning time and staff development. Developing students 4-6 years are provided the same academic support in the core subjects. For ENL students receiving services for four plus years and former ELLs, the ENL after school support program is available as well. Our ENL teachers have an open door policy whereby any and all ENL students may come to her for help in any problem areas, especially where language may be of concern. In addition, the students in the ENL class work together as partners and more experienced students build their skills through the work they do to support the newcomers. Our ENL teachers use the SmartBoard to provide visual learning opportunities for all of her students in addition to the use of realia and graphic organizers as part of her lessons. We are a small school and currently we have three students who are 6 years plus which include two student with an IEP . Six year students participate in the same programs as identified above and receive support based on their individual needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ENL teachers and the general education staff in tandem with Instructional Support Teachers use: scaffolding, homogeneous and heterogeneous grouping when appropriate, differentiated instruction, graphic organizers, etc. The materials used: grade level text books, dictionaries, glossaries, vocabulary toolkit. In addition, the ELL's who are SWD as well will be provided scaffolded materials and tiered support. During weekly discipline/content team meetings, staff plans, sets goals and benchmarks, and develops curriculum maps that are common core aligned and modify the curriculum for all students to gain equal access to instruction (Ells and Ell-SWD). CAAS provides an IPAD cart (that includes a Duolingo application) to provide additional technological support. ELLS and ELL-SWDs receive additional support provided by our ENL teachers two extra periods per week to address students' language needs in all disciplines. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Scheduling provides for our ENL teachers to meet with the ELA content team teachers along with the Special Education teachers, two(2) periods per week. This ensures that ELL-SWDs are working towards achieving their IEP goals and language proficiency mandates. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ENL teachers co-teach in ELA classes with ELLs. Our ENL teachers work collaboratively with the content teachers to identify ELL student needs in math, science and social studies. She uses this data to plan and work with her students during after school program. In addition, she provides her colleagues in the other discplines with strategies.. Content area teachers ensure ELLs have access to bilingual glossaries in their subject area in addition to identifying and directly teaching specific vocabulary needed for comprehension. Data is gleaned from discipline meetings in addition to report card grades. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ENL teachers will continue to use the Academic Vocabulary Tool Kit Curriculum and will implement strategies to assist ENL students in mastering the skills needed to work with the academic language demands of the CCLS. In addition, our ENL teachers are using the iPad cart and Smart board technology in thier classroom. The students use the Duolingo application, where they are learning how to speak English as well as grammar and vocabulary. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. CAAS offers ELL students equal access to all school programs (i.e., Culinary and Law) including after-school tutoring. These programs provide extra support for ELL students in US schools less than three years, receiving service 4 to 6 years and long-term ELLs that have completed 6 years. Through the Integrated Co-teaching model, ELL students receive instruction in an academic setting. We have a campus-wide SIFE program that offers academic classes and support on Saturdays. Students also may join teams through PSAL, drama through Opening Act and our various Community Partner programs. SIFE program which provides academic classes with language proficiency support are offered on Saturdays. When various programs become available or are offered to CAAS, the ENL teacher advises the ELLs of these opportunities to participate. This is done in writing (in the form of a flier or schedule) and also verbally announced in classes. Many of our ELLs enjoy participating in many academic, physical and social programs provided by CAAS and outside sources. They are well represented in these activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. CAAS uses the following instructional materials: SmartBoard technology, over head projectors, dictionaries, glossaries, textbooks, maps and diagrams, and iPads. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is provided by our foreign language teacher , three bilingual paraprofessionals and our state certified ENL teacher. In addition, students have access to IPads where they can use various NL programs including Duolingo, as well as use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Students may request to take regents in their native language(where applicable). If students are taking the regents exam in English (other than ELA), they are provided with a test-related glossary in their native language where appropriate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As stated above, our intervention services and ICT classes provide students with equal access to the curriculum based on their academic needs. Since our school personalizes instruction, teacher teams make instructional decisions based on student needs and revise them based on their process and progress. In addition, CAAS has content team meetings, in addition to weekly staff development, to structure curriculum maps to include scaffolding and multiple pathways to learning. ELL students are assessed based on their current level and planned for accordingly. Students are made aware of their goals and are involved in their learning process. As students grow in language proficiency, their plans are revised. If additional support is needed, it is provided. We have three (3) ELL students that have IEPs. Students who required special support services are given support classes in accordance with their mandates. Our intervention services include, after school support classes, tutoring, Achieve 3000, Duolingo application on Ipads for language and literacy proficiency, ICT to provide additional support in all core classes and push-in support. We also have a campus-wide SIFE program held on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Students who reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT, will continue to receive ENL services as needed, in addition to any other related support from our intervention services. In addition, students will have opportunities for advancement in our College Now Programs. CAAS offers Orientation prior to the beginning of the new school year. It takes place in August and/or September depending on family availability. This is in addition to year-long customizable orientations for the convenience of incoming parents. All students are invited to attend. CAAS offers a Spanish elective to all ELL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? CAAS ENL students have the opportunity to participate in our campus-wide Saturday support program, PSAL sports teams and multi-school dances and events. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Any ENL student that is enrolled in school prior to the September opening is invited to our orientation where they will meet the teachers and other students. In addition, CAAS offers year-long customizable orientations for the convenience of incoming parents. Students that enroll throughout the school year are paired with other ELL students in order to help them acclimate to their new school setting. In addition to Integrated Co-Teaching ELA classes, students receive ENL support throughout the year in the ENL standalone classes that meet seven (7) periods per week. Our ENL teacherss also have tutoring after school two periods per week. Our campus has a support program that offers classes after school and on Saturday. Parents are provided translation services and kept informed through Skedula, which provides messages in text, email and telephone formats in their native language, and translated written correspondence. Both of our guidance counselor has participated in clinics offered by the Goddard Institute providing information for helping immigrant students get into college. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer second and third year Spanish for students to take as electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We continually provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of our English language learners. We will provide a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2 that must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For our ENL teacher, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All CAAS staff are invited to participate in any and all professional development. Our ENL teachers attend PDs throughout the year, focusing on ENL workshops. They meet with the ELA teachers in content team meetings. They will attend workshops offered through the DELLSS’ website. They have implemented the Academic Vocabulary Tool kit and continues to attend the workshops offered. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As part of our support for staff, we provide weekly staff development . We discuss and create action plans for all students in need, that include support and strategies for ELL support. Our ENL teachers have given a PD on ENL at our staff meetings. The topics included for all content area instruction are: scaffolding, slowing down speech, academic vocabulary tool kit, guidelines 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  of RTI, strategic grouping and how to use it, using visual aides and creating a print rich environment. All records are kept and maintained in the main office as well as in the Principal's office. Binders are created and dated as materials are used in professional developments provided to staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? C.A.A.S is a small school with 36 ELL students. Our ENL teachers work with students and their families as needed. She meets with parents and students and reviews their portfolios and progress. In addition our school has Skedula/PupilPath (electronic grade book) to which parents and students have access. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Coordinator, as well as our Guidance Counselors work with incoming ELL parents to insure that any needs are addressed. In addition, the Parent Coordinator has set up a parent network where parents can contact him at any time and day of the week. He keeps our ELL parents consistently informed in their native language if necessary and works to provide opportunities to visit and spend time at our school. In addition, he works with the PTA Council to be sure there is consistent parent outreach to build additional parent involvement. The Parent Coordinator also works to offer workshops at our school as a means of parental support. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sanatha Alexis, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: C.A.A.S. School DBN: 18K629 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sanatha Alexis Title Principal Halley Tache Assistant Principal Martin Young Parent Coordinator Julie Nalty ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mrs. Charlene Hodge Parent Marie Petit-Blanc/Math Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kenneth Tanzer School Counselor Michael Prayor Aaron Perez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member South Luisana Victorica Other School Counselor Soueretter Fougere Other Field Support Staff Member - South Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K629 School Name: Cultural Academy for the Arts and S Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Julie Halley Nalty Tache ESL Teacher A.P. Yes YES Yes YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Cultural Academy for the Arts and Sciences provides parents with written communication in their home languages. We gather this information during the intake process on how they want to receive communications, and ensure that it is documented on the Student Emergency Contact cards. Also, during the initial meeting with the family they are asked if they need a translator. This is documented in the student's file. We also have allocated monies for on site interpretation if need be by our three bilingual paraprofessionals ( 2 Spanish, 1 Haitian-Creole), foreign language teacher (Spanish), ENL teacher (French, Haitian Creole), bi-lingual math teacher (Haitian Creole and French). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Haitian Creole Spanish Arabic Chinese Any French (American) Sign Language Mandarin 330 24 12 8 3 2 0 0 86.84 6.32 3.16 2.11 .79 .53 0 0 328 27 12 8 1 1 0 1 86.32 7.11 3.16 2.11 .26 .26 0 .26 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Back to School Letter 8/28 Campus Cell-phone Policy 8/28 Instructions for Registering for PupilPath 9/05/18 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Submit completed Translation Request Form along with the letter to be translated to NYC DOE Translation Services unit by 07/28. Submit completed Translation Request Form along with policy to be translated to NYC DOE Translation Services unit by 07/28. Skedula will automatically generate letters in student's preferred home language based on information pulled from ATS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Curriculum Night Invitation 9/26/18 Parent-Teacher Conference Notices 10/29 and 2/26 Regents Week Information 01/19 and 06/01 Notification about Monthly Parent Workshops 08/25 and monthly Submit completed Translation Request Form along with the invitation to be translated to NYC DOE Translation Services unit by 08/18 Submit completed Translation Request Form along with the notice to be translated to NYC DOE Translation Services unit by 09/29 and 01/26 respectively Submit completed Translation Request Form along with information sheet to be translated, to NYC DOE Translation Services unit by 12/19 and 05/21 respectively Submit completed Translation Request Form along with notice to be translated, to NYC DOE Translation Services unit at least 1 month in advance. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Contract DOE vendor to provide translation services in Haitian Creole and Spanish Curriculum Night 9/26/18 Utilize over-the-phone interpretation services for other languages. Contract DOE vendor to provide translation services in Haitian Creole and Spanish Parent Teacher Conferences 11/29-11/30 and 03/07 - 03/08 Parent Workshops Once per month Utilize over-the-phone interpretation services for other languages. Pay bilingual staff per session to serve as interpreters at these workshops. . . . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, we will use the Short Message Service (SMS) feature available through I.O education that has a translation feature. We will also use the bilingual members of staff to help make phone calls to parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During PD on the opening days of school: 1. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and link to translation and interpretation resources will be shared with staff 2. Staff will be also given the information to access over-the-phone interpretation services and "Guidelines for Working with Interpreters" Document 3. Laminated copies of the Language ID Guide will be provided to every staff member - Language Access Coordinator will attend training provided by the Brooklyn South Field Support Center and turnkey information to staff -Parent coordinator will attend training provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and turnkey to staff Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) C.A.A.S has posted the Welcome Poster in the Center (Main) Hall. The Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access are included in our parent folder for new students. The Language ID Guide is posted at the Main security desk on the first floor as well as on our General Office room 331B. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Mr. Young, Parent Coordinator, Ms. Tache, Assistant Principal, Ms. Nalty, ENL Teacher with the support of ENL Parents will have a focus group that is inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school in order to gather feedback and best practices on the quality and availability of our services. In the Spring we will administer (in the preferred languages) for limited-English-proficient parents to provide feedback on language services provided by CAAS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83 
